[Race affects our lives in countless ways. To read provocative stories on race from The Times, sign up here for our weekly Race/Related newsletter.]

Cloistered in my Brooklyn quarantine, I’ve probably been wondering about some of the same things you have: How come the United States only has 2.4 acute care beds per 1,000 people, about one-third the number in South Korea? Why is American unemployment insurance so stingy? And critically, how can it be that one in 10 people in the richest country in the history of the world must face the worst epidemic in 100 years without access to health care?

The reason, in my view, is the same one that explains why the United States suffers the highest rate of infant mortality among advanced countries, why our poverty is higher and why our suicide rates are off the charts. In the United States, people are expected to survive on their own. Those who cannot, are often left to sink.

I just wrote a book about this. I called it “American Poison.”

In the book I argue that the reason behind America’s decision to let so many people keep sinking is because the people who are sinking are often black and brown. And that when white America — the part of America that has the most political power — has been asked to show empathy across racial lines, it has usually refused.

People of color were denied access to many of the benefits provided by Franklin D. Roosevelt’s New Deal. If they had been given access, Southern Democrats wouldn’t have voted for it. When Lyndon B. Johnson opened America’s welfare state to African-Americans and other minorities 30 years later, the political consensus that had set America down the path of social democracy soon collapsed.

If the safety net had to be shared with people of color, many white Americans decided they would rather not have one at all.

Since then, the public debate over welfare has been clouded by racist stereotypes about corrupt, undeserving “welfare queens” who take money from hardworking white taxpayers. The cruel irony is that the inability to extend empathy across racial lines has harmed white Americans, too. Much of white America, the part addled by opioids, ravaged by suicide, despairing of a future, is also a victim of this poisonous way of thinking.

Maybe the coronavirus outbreak will shock us into understanding just how much damage racial hostility — contempt, bigotry, mistrust, fear — has inflicted upon American society. Big crises, I’m told, often bring people together. But the challenge is hardly trivial. For starters, we must build an understanding of what it is to be American that includes everyone.

Invite someone to subscribe to the Race/Related newsletter. Or email your thoughts and suggestions to racerelated@nytimes.com. Race/Related is a newsletter focused on race, identity and culture. It is published weekly on Saturday mornings at 7 a.m. and edited by Lauretta Charlton.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — Senate Republicans were struggling to salvage a more than $1 trillion economic rescue package to respond to the coronavirus crisis when they got the message on Sunday afternoon: One of their own had been walking around the Capitol with Covid-19 for days as they debated how best to confront the rapidly spreading pandemic.

Senator Rand Paul had tested positive for the coronavirus, Senator Mitch McConnell, the majority leader, told fellow Republicans over lunch. It was the news that lawmakers had been dreading for weeks as they went about their travel- and handshake-heavy routines while the disease circulated around the country.

The news set off a frantic race to retrace the steps of Mr. Paul, who had continued to show up in the Senate — even using the private senators’ gym, where he swam laps in the pool on Sunday morning — until he received the results of his coronavirus test sometime after his workout.

It injected a potentially dangerous new element into the intense negotiation over a stabilization package to bolster the country’s health system and social safety net and to prop up an economy teetering on the brink of collapse.

Mr. Paul, 57, Republican of Kentucky and a former practicing eye doctor, was “asymptomatic,” his staff said, relieving immediate concerns about his health despite a 2017 injury that affected his lungs. But his diagnosis raised the likelihood that other members of the 100-person Senate, where nearly half are 65 or older, had been exposed and might fall ill or need to self-quarantine just as they were racing to enact the rescue plan.

Mr. Paul had been informed last weekend that he had attended a fund-raiser in Kentucky with two individuals who later tested positive for Covid-19, a warning that sent a handful of other prominent elected officials into self-quarantine out of caution.

Not Mr. Paul.

He pressed on with his Washington schedule anyway. On Wednesday afternoon, he spoke and voted on the Senate floor. He dined at the Republicans’ closed luncheon on Thursday and on Friday, sitting with fellow senators. And after being informed of the diagnosis on Sunday, Senator Jerry Moran, Republican of Kansas, rose to tell fellow Republicans at lunch that he had seen Mr. Paul that morning at the senators-only gym, according to two people who heard him and Mr. Moran’s spokesman.

“I’ve never commented about a fellow Senator’s choices/actions. Never once,” Senator Kyrsten Sinema, Democrat of Arizona, who is known to frequent the senators-only pool, wrote on Twitter. “This, America, is absolutely irresponsible. You cannot be near other people while waiting for coronavirus test results. It endangers others & likely increases the spread of the virus.” (A spokesman for Ms. Sinema said she had been practicing social distancing and had not been to the pool in two weeks.)

The ripples could quickly be felt around the Capitol, one of the few places where work has continued in defiance of public health guidance that has shuttered most workplaces and discouraged large gatherings.

Both of Utah’s Republican senators, Mitt Romney and Mike Lee, said Sunday afternoon that they would voluntarily quarantine themselves after close contact with Mr. Paul in recent days. They will now be unable to directly affect what could prove to be one of the most consequential votes of their careers.

Mr. Lee said he would be unable to fly or vote for 14 days. He did not report any symptoms of the virus.

Mr. Romney also said he felt fine but had been advised by the attending physician of Congress to isolate himself and get tested. He will be unable to see his wife, Ann, for two weeks because she has multiple sclerosis.

“Very, very unhappy to hear that Rand Paul has been diagnosed with Covid-19 — wish him the very best,” a visibly shaken Mr. Romney told reporters outside the Republican luncheon. He added, “And of course all senators are going to take steps to make sure that we don’t in any way spread this virus ourselves.”

At a news conference at the White House on Sunday evening, President Trump appeared to take some satisfaction in the situation of Mr. Romney, who voted last month to remove him from office on impeachment charges.

“Romney’s in isolation?” Mr. Trump said, stretching out the word “gee” before adding, “That’s too bad.”

Asked by a reporter if he was being sarcastic, Mr. Trump looked down and shook his head.

“No, no. None, whatsoever,” he said.

Others who had recently been near Mr. Paul sought guidance on Sunday from Brian P. Monahan, the attending physician of Congress, though they continued to move through the Capitol.

In publicly announcing the news, Mr. Paul’s office played down the diagnosis and did not answer several questions about the senator’s activities and decision-making.

His deputy chief of staff, Sergio Gor, initially said that Mr. Paul was “asymptomatic and was tested out of an abundance of caution due to his extensive travel and events.” His Washington office began operating remotely 10 days ago, Mr. Gor said, and “hence virtually no staff has had contact” with him.

Hours later, Mr. Gor was more specific. He said the senator had decided to undergo testing “after attending an event where two individuals subsequently tested positive for Covid-19, even though he wasn’t aware of any direct contact with either one of them.”

That appeared to be a reference to a fund-raiser Mr. Paul went to this month in Louisville, Ky., where two attendees later tested positive for the virus. After the museum that hosted the event alerted attendees in an email last Sunday, several officials who had also been present — including the state’s governor and Louisville’s mayor — scrambled to get tested.

Representative John Yarmuth, Democrat of Kentucky and the chairman of the House Budget Committee, announced that he would self-quarantine for two weeks while awaiting the results of his test, which later came back negative.

In an email to The New York Times on Sunday, Mr. Gor did not explain why Mr. Paul had been in the Senate gym Sunday morning if he knew he could have the disease. Mr. Gor did not disclose precisely when Mr. Paul had been tested.

After Mr. Moran reported his Sunday morning encounter with the senator, Mr. Paul’s staff posted on Twitter that he had “left the Senate IMMEDIATELY upon learning of his diagnosis.”

“He had zero contact with anyone & went into quarantine,” they added, sidestepping why the senator had been in the gym in the first place.

Mr. Paul, an ophthalmologist by training, was a practicing doctor before joining the Senate. Like his father, Ron Paul, a former member of Congress, he considers himself a libertarian. Last week, he was one of only three senators to vote against a multibillion-dollar rescue bill to help fight the coronavirus because its costs had not been paid for and would contribute to the national debt.

Mr. Paul could be at elevated risk for adverse effects from the novel coronavirus, which can cause pneumonia, sometimes severe. In November 2017, Mr. Paul was violently attacked by his neighbor in Kentucky during a dispute and had to be hospitalized. As a result of the ensuing injuries, Mr. Paul had to undergo surgery in August to have part of his lung removed.

Two other members of Congress — Representative Mario Diaz-Balart, Republican of Florida, and Representative Ben McAdams, Democrat of Utah — have also tested positive for Covid-19. Mr. McAdams said in a statement on Sunday that he had been hospitalized and given oxygen over the weekend, but that his condition had stabilized.

When a half dozen other senators were exposed to individuals who had tested positive for the virus, they voluntarily self-isolated, as top health officials have advised. They also made sure to communicate with constituents that following the guidelines was an important matter of life and death, even for their elected leaders. Senator Cory Gardner, Republican of Colorado, has been absent from the Senate for much of the week for that reason.

Privately, some lawmakers were incensed that Mr. Paul had continued to circulate among colleagues when he knew he might have the virus.

“Common sense would tell you, you shouldn’t expose people until you’ve been cleared,” Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, told CNN. Mr. Graham voluntarily self-isolated earlier this month after being in contact with someone who tested positive for the virus.

Emily Cochrane contributed reporting.

<|endoftext|>

A hospital in Washington State projects that it may not have enough ventilators in two weeks. New York State could be thousands of ventilators short of what it needs. In Michigan, a hospital system has prepared warnings for patients about what will happen if it gets more patients than it can handle.

The answers are stark: some patients would get full intensive care treatment, some would not. But which ones?

Across the country, hospitals and public health officials are working on plans for what happens if the number of coronavirus patients exceeds the available space in intensive care units.

Many states have developed triage plans for what happens in a natural disaster or a severe pandemic, if hospitals are overwhelmed. As the coronavirus pandemic expands, they have been re-examining those plans, hoping they will be useful if hospitals have more critically ill patients than ventilators.

The New York Times reviewed triage strategy documents from Alabama, Arizona, Kansas, Louisiana, Maryland, Michigan, New York, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Utah and Washington State to see what factors they propose to use to decide which patients get potentially life-saving treatments.

Some of the plans may be revised as more information on Covid-19 becomes available; these are the versions that have been made publicly available.

Almost all of the plans give priority to otherwise healthy people who are most likely to fully recover. But it is not that simple.

The plans struggle to address a range of ethical issues, and also matters of social equality. People with underlying medical problems may get ranked lower, yet low-income people and people of color often have more health problems because they cannot afford top-notch care.

Do they go to the back of the line? People with disabilities also have concerns.

How much legal force these plans carry varies from state to state. Some states have laws that may protect providers from at least some types of liability for following the guidelines in an official emergency; in most states, including New York, the legal protections they offer are less clear.

One underlying assumption: They should only be implemented if other measures fail. “When the system is at risk of becoming overwhelmed, the goal then becomes to conserve, substitute, adapt and reuse,” said a report released Sunday by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine.

Making these life and death choices, it said, should be done “only in the most extreme of circumstances.”

If a hospital has a shortage of resources, the first thing it may consider is whether to decline admission to an intensive care unit to people who have conditions that will likely result in near-immediate death even if they get that treatment.

One common strategy, including for New York and Maryland, is to exclude patients who may have a cardiac arrest that is unresponsive to standard interventions such as defibrillation. Plans can also exclude those who may have had a major brain injury or severe burns where the likelihood of survival is low.

A triage plan on the Alabama health department’s website suggests that “persons with severe mental retardation” are among those who “may be poor candidates for ventilator support.” Washington State’s guidelines include the consideration of a “baseline functional status” for each patient, considering such factors as declines in energy level, physical ability and cognition.

Federal civil rights officials recently announced they will not allow hospitals to discriminate on the basis of disabilities, race, age or religion.

The plan on Alabama’s website would also use AIDS as a factor in deciding to exclude someone for ventilator support, but Alabama officials said they have replaced the plan with a different set of guidelines. The newer policies do not address questions about ventilator triage.

In Washington State, doctors can also consider withholding advanced care for patients with “severe congestive heart failure,” “severe chronic lung disease” or “severe cirrhotic liver disease with multiorgan dysfunction,” as well as other major problems with a poor prognosis for recovery.

Louisiana may exclude patients with severe dementia.

For those who do qualify for I.C.U. care, hospitals would then look to further prioritize patients.

Maryland’s guidelines, for example, would score patients with a combination of factors that largely seek to assess both short-term and long-term survivability. In the event that two patients have the same estimated survivability, the scoring protocols give younger people better odds of getting treatment, with the “lowest priority” given to patients 85 and older.

Some of the states rely at least in part on a score known as the Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA), which measures the functioning of major body systems, including the heart, lungs, kidneys, liver, blood and neurological system. Patients with high SOFA scores would be less likely to qualify.

The scoring system was never meant for this use, and some experts question how accurate it will be in predicting survival. Some plans use different scoring systems or use a sliding scale so that someone whose score is slightly higher than an arbitrary cutoff does not get automatically excluded if it turns out there are enough ventilators.

The guidelines in Maryland also look at severe pre-existing health problems likely to result in death within a year. But they do not seek to project survivability beyond a year, in part to avoid disadvantaging the poor and people of color.

An interim guideline produced in Pennsylvania in March uses SOFA scoring but also takes into consideration the likelihood of long-term survival, such as for patients with Alzheimer’s disease or those with cancer who have less than 10 years of expected survival.

It groups people into different color codes: red, orange or yellow, with red being first in line for the most aggressive treatment. New York also uses color coding: blue for people who don’t qualify for such care, red for those who are the highest priority, yellow for those who should get ventilators if they are available and green for those who do not need lifesaving resources.

Here’s an example of how the guidelines could compare patients needing a ventilator in Maryland:

Patient A: 24 years old, with a SOFA score of 13 (indicating signs of failure across multiple organ systems) but no pre-existing conditions that would limit life expectancy to less than a year. The person’s high SOFA score would give them three overall points.

Patient B: 72 years old, with a SOFA score of 10 (indicating significant but less-severe signs of organs failing), and moderate Alzheimer’s disease but no pre-existing conditions that would limit life expectancy to less than a year. This patient would end up with an overall score of two because the SOFA score is lower.

The older person would qualify for care first.

But in Pennsylvania, the person with moderate Alzheimer’s would score additional points, under the guidelines, leading the younger person to qualify for care first.

There are other factors that might get considered along the way.

For a pregnant woman with a healthy fetus, the Maryland guidelines give a one-point credit, while Pennsylvania offers a two-point benefit. Utah guidelines provide one or two points depending on how far into the pregnancy the mother is.

The Pennsylvania guidelines also offer a one-point benefit to health workers playing a role in responding to a crisis.

If two people have the same score under the Pennsylvania guidelines, the tiebreaker goes to the person in the youngest age group. Maryland also uses age as a tiebreaker, and says hospitals that need to make further evaluations should use a fair and transparent way of deciding: “This might mean first-come, first-served or some form of lottery.”

There are fewer intensive care unit resources for children in the United States, compared to adults, and children often require different equipment than adults do. Relatively few children have become critically ill with Covid-19. Still, some of the plans offer specific guidelines for younger patients.

In New York, the guidelines rely heavily on the judgment of doctors to assess a young patient’s risk of death. The doctor is supposed to take into consideration a variety of health conditions, including morbid obesity, impaired growth and intractable seizures, all of which may weigh against the most advanced lifesaving care for coronavirus.

Pennsylvania’s guidelines follow a similar scoring protocol as the one used for adults. They offer some specific guidance, such as for extreme preterm infants with low birth weights and a low chance of survival. If there is a scarcity of neonatal I.C.U. beds, those newborns would not be candidates for ventilator support.

In Alabama, the guidelines on the state website say that “children with severe neurological problems” may be denied ventilator support.

Washington State’s strategy asks doctors to re-evaluate their patients on ventilators about once a day. If a patient’s condition has improved, they could be moved out of the I.C.U. to make room for new patients. If their condition is worsening, even with the ventilator, it suggests that doctors may want to shift them into end-of-life care to free up space for someone else.

Doctors are particularly concerned about these measures, because the conditions of critically ill patients with Covid-19 often worsen before improving. Some people who survive require days to weeks on a ventilator. If patients are removed too quickly, they may lose their chance to recover.

New York’s guidelines say that if a patient continues to show improvement, he or she will continue on ventilator therapy. But if that person’s condition worsens, ventilator care may be discontinued.

Those who prepared New York’s plan acknowledged that a decision to remove someone from a ventilator may be traumatic to patients, families and staff members.

“However, removing a ventilator from a patient who worsens or does not improve so that another patient with a strong likelihood of survival may have an opportunity for treatment helps support the goal of saving the greatest number of lives,” it says.

Arizona

Kansas

Louisiana

Maryland

Michigan

New York

Pennsylvania

Tennessee

Utah

Washington State

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — Early on, the dozen federal officials charged with defending America against the coronavirus gathered day after day in the White House Situation Room, consumed by crises. They grappled with how to evacuate the United States consulate in Wuhan, China, ban Chinese travelers and extract Americans from the Diamond Princess and other cruise ships.

The members of the coronavirus task force typically devoted only five or 10 minutes, often at the end of contentious meetings, to talk about testing, several participants recalled. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, its leaders assured the others, had developed a diagnostic model that would be rolled out quickly as a first step.

But as the deadly virus spread from China with ferocity across the United States between late January and early March, large-scale testing of people who might have been infected did not happen — because of technical flaws, regulatory hurdles, business-as-usual bureaucracies and lack of leadership at multiple levels, according to interviews with more than 50 current and former public health officials, administration officials, senior scientists and company executives.

The result was a lost month, when the world’s richest country — armed with some of the most highly trained scientists and infectious disease specialists — squandered its best chance of containing the virus’s spread. Instead, Americans were left largely blind to the scale of a looming public health catastrophe.

The absence of robust screening until it was “far too late” revealed failures across the government, said Dr. Thomas Frieden, the former C.D.C. director. Jennifer Nuzzo, an epidemiologist at Johns Hopkins, said the Trump administration had “incredibly limited” views of the pathogen’s potential impact. Dr. Margaret Hamburg, the former commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, said the lapse enabled “exponential growth of cases.”

And Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, a top government scientist involved in the fight against the virus, told members of Congress that the early inability to test was “a failing” of the administration’s response to a deadly, global pandemic. “Why,” he asked later in a magazine interview, “were we not able to mobilize on a broader scale?”

Across the government, they said, three agencies responsible for detecting and combating threats like the coronavirus failed to prepare quickly enough. Even as scientists looked at China and sounded alarms, none of the agencies’ directors conveyed the urgency required to spur a no-holds-barred defense.

Dr. Robert R. Redfield, 68, a former military doctor and prominent AIDS researcher who directs the C.D.C., trusted his veteran scientists to create the world’s most precise test for the coronavirus and share it with state laboratories. When flaws in the test became apparent in February, he promised a quick fix, though it took weeks to settle on a solution.

The C.D.C. also tightly restricted who could get tested and was slow to conduct “community-based surveillance,” a standard screening practice to detect the virus’s reach. Had the United States been able to track its earliest movements and identify hidden hot spots, local quarantines might have confined the disease.

Dr. Stephen Hahn, 60, the commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, enforced regulations that paradoxically made it tougher for hospitals, private clinics and companies to deploy diagnostic tests in an emergency. Other countries that had mobilized businesses were performing tens of thousands of tests daily, compared with fewer than 100 on average in the United States, frustrating local health officials, lawmakers and desperate Americans.

Alex M. Azar II, who led the Department of Health and Human Services, oversaw the two other agencies and coordinated the government’s public health response to the pandemic. While he grew frustrated as public criticism over the testing issues intensified, he was unable to push either agency to speed up or change course.

Mr. Azar, 52, who chaired the coronavirus task force until late February, when Vice President Mike Pence took charge, had been at odds for months with the White House over other issues. The task force’s chief liaison to the president was Mick Mulvaney, the acting White House chief of staff, who was being forced out by Mr. Trump. Without high-level interest — or demands for action — the testing issue festered.

At the start of that crucial lost month, when his government could have rallied, the president was distracted by impeachment and dismissive of the threat to the public’s health or the nation’s economy. By the end of the month, Mr. Trump claimed the virus was about to dissipate in the United States, saying: “It’s going to disappear. One day — it’s like a miracle — it will disappear.”

By early March, after federal officials finally announced changes to expand testing, it was too late. With the early lapses, containment was no longer an option. The tool kit of epidemiology would shift — lockdowns, social disruption, intensive medical treatment — in hopes of mitigating the harm.

Now, the United States has more than 100,000 coronavirus cases, the most of any country in the world. Deaths are rising, cities are shuttered, the economy is sputtering and everyday life is upended. And still, many Americans sickened by the virus cannot get tested.

In a statement, Judd Deere, a White House spokesman, said that “any suggestion that President Trump did not take the threat of Covid-19 seriously or that the United States was not prepared is false.” He added that at Mr. Trump’s direction, the administration had “expanded testing capacities.”

Dr. Bruce Aylward, a senior adviser at the World Health Organization, led an expert team to China last month to research the mysterious new virus. Testing, he said, was “absolutely vital” for understanding how to defeat a disease — what distinguishes it from others, the spectrum of illness and, most important, its path through populations.

“You want to know whether or not you have it,” Dr. Aylward said. “You want to know whether the people around you have it. Because you know what? Then you could stop it.”

“You can’t stop it,” he warned, “if you can’t see it.”

The first time Dr. Robert Redfield heard about the severity of the virus from his Chinese counterparts was around New Year’s Day, when he was on vacation with his family. He spent so much time on the phone that they barely saw him. And what he heard rattled him; in one grim conversation about the virus days later, George F. Gao, the director of the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, burst into tears.

Dr. Redfield, a longtime AIDS researcher, had never run a government agency before his appointment to lead the C.D.C. in 2018. Until then, his biggest priorities had been fighting the opioid epidemic and the spread of H.I.V. Suddenly, a man who preferred treating patients in Haiti or Africa to being in the public glare was facing a new pandemic threat.

At first, Dr. Redfield’s agency moved quickly.

On Jan. 7, the C.D.C. created an “incident management system” for the coronavirus and advised travelers to Wuhan to take precautions. By Jan. 20, just two weeks after Chinese scientists shared the genetic sequence of the virus, the C.D.C. had developed its own test, as usual, and deployed it to detect the country’s first coronavirus case.

“That’s our prime mission,” Dr. Redfield said later in an interview, “to get eyes on this thing.”

Assessing the virus would prove challenging. It was so new that scientists had little information to work with. China provided limited data, and rebuffed an early attempt by Mr. Azar and Dr. Redfield to send C.D.C. experts there to learn more. That the virus could cause no symptoms and still spread — something not initially known — made it all the more difficult to understand.

To identify the virus, the C.D.C. test used three small genetic sequences to match up with portions of a virus’s genome extracted from a swab. A German-developed test that the W.H.O. was distributing to other countries used just two, potentially making it less precise.

But soon after the F.D.A. cleared the C.D.C. to share its test kits with state health department labs, some discovered a problem. The third sequence, or “probe,” gave inconclusive results. While the C.D.C. explored the cause — contamination or a design issue — it told those state labs to stop testing.

The startling setback stalled the C.D.C.’s efforts to track the virus when it mattered most. By mid-February, the nation was testing only about 100 samples per day, according to the C.D.C.’s website.

Dr. Redfield played down the problem in task force meetings and conversations with Mr. Azar, assuring him it would be fixed quickly, several administration officials said.

With capacity so limited, the C.D.C.’s criteria for who was tested remained extremely narrow for weeks to come: only people who had recently traveled to China or had been in contact with someone who had the virus.

The lack of tests in the states also meant local public health officials could not use another essential epidemiological tool: surveillance testing. To see where the virus might be hiding, nasal swab samples from people screened for the common flu would also be checked for the coronavirus.

The C.D.C. announced a plan on Feb. 14 to perform the screening in five high-risk cities: New York, Chicago, Los Angeles, San Francisco and Seattle. An agency official said it could provide “an early warning signal to trigger a change in our response strategy.” But most of the cities could not carry it out.

“Had we had done more testing from the very beginning and caught cases earlier,” said Dr. Nuzzo, of Johns Hopkins, “we would be in a far different place.”

The consequences became clear by the end of February. For the first time, someone with no known exposure to the virus or history of travel tested positive, in the Seattle area, where the U.S.’s first case had been detected more than a month earlier. The virus had probably been spreading there and elsewhere for weeks, researchers later concluded. Without a more complete picture of who had been infected, public health workers could not do “contact tracing” — finding all those with whom any contagious people had interacted and then quarantining them to stop further transmission.

The C.D.C. gave little thought to adopting the test being used by the W.H.O. The C.D.C.’s test was working in its own lab — still processing samples from states — which gave agency officials confidence. Dr. Anne Schuchat, the agency’s principal deputy director, would later say that the C.D.C. did not think “we needed somebody else’s test.”

And the German-designed W.H.O. test had not been through the American regulatory approval process, which would take time.

Throughout February, Dr. Redfield shuttled between Atlanta, where the C.D.C. is based, and Washington, holding multiple calls every day with Mr. Azar and participating in the coronavirus task force.

Mr. Azar’s take-charge style contrasted with the more deliberative manner of Dr. Redfield, who lacked the kind of commanding television presence that impressed Mr. Trump. He was “a consensus person,” as one colleague described him, who sought to avoid conflict. He relied heavily on some of the C.D.C.’s career scientists, like Dr. Schuchat and Dr. Nancy Messonnier, the director of the agency’s National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases.

Under scrutiny from Congress, Dr. Redfield offered reassurances. Responding on Feb. 24 to a letter from 49 members of Congress about the need for testing in the states, he wrote, “CDC’s aggressive response enables us to identify potential cases early and make sure that they are properly handled.”

Days later, his agency provided a workaround, telling state and local health department labs that they could finally begin testing. Rather than awaiting replacements, they should use their C.D.C. test kits and leave out the problematic third probe.

Meanwhile, the agency’s epidemiologists were growing more concerned as the virus spread in South Korea and Italy. On Feb. 25, Dr. Messonnier gave a briefing with a much blunter warning than usual. “Disruption to everyday life might be severe,” she said.

Mr. Trump, returning from a trip to India, was furious, according to senior administration officials. Later that day, Mr. Azar seemed to be tamping down the level of concern. All Dr. Messonnier had meant, he said at a news conference, was that people should “start thinking about, in their own lives, what that might involve.”

“Might,” Mr. Azar repeated emphatically. “Might involve.”

Dr. Stephen Hahn’s first day as F.D.A. commissioner came just six weeks before Mr. Azar declared a public health emergency on Jan. 31. A radiation oncologist and researcher who helped turn around MD Anderson in Houston, one of the nation’s leading cancer centers, Dr. Hahn had come to Washington to oversee a sprawling federal agency that regulates everything from lifesaving therapies to dog food.

But overnight, his mission — to manage 15,000 employees in a culture defined by precision and caution — was upended. A pathogen that Mr. Trump would later call the “invisible enemy” was hurtling toward the United States. It would fall to the newly arrived Dr. Hahn to help build a huge national capacity for testing by academic and private labs.

Instead, under his leadership, the F.D.A. became a significant roadblock, according to current and former officials as well as researchers and doctors at laboratories around the country.

Private-sector tests were supposed to be the next tier after the C.D.C. fulfilled its obligation to jump-start screening at public labs. In other countries hit hard by the coronavirus, governments acted quickly to speed tests to their populations. In South Korea, for example, regulators in early February summoned executives from 20 medical manufacturers, easing rules as they demanded tests.

But Dr. Hahn took a cautious approach. He was not proactive in reaching out to manufacturers, and instead deferred to his scientists, following the F.D.A.’s often cumbersome methods for approving medical screening.

Even the nation’s public health labs were looking for the F.D.A.’s help. “We are now many weeks into the response with still no diagnostic or surveillance test available outside of C.D.C. for the vast majority of our member laboratories,” Scott Becker, chief executive of the Association of Public Health Laboratories, wrote to Mr. Hahn in late February. “We believe a more expeditious route is needed at this time.”

Ironically, it was Mr. Azar’s emergency declaration that established the rules Dr. Hahn insisted on following. Designed to make it easier for drugmakers to pursue vaccines and other therapies during a crisis, such a declaration lets the F.D.A. speed approvals that could otherwise take a year or more.

But the emergency announcement created a new barrier for hospitals and laboratories that wanted to create their own tests to diagnose the coronavirus. Usually, they faced minimal federal regulation. But once Mr. Azar took action, they were subject to an F.D.A. process called an “emergency use authorization.”

Even though researchers around the country quickly began creating tests that could diagnose Covid-19, many said they were hindered by the F.D.A.’s approval process. The new tests sat unused at labs around the country.

Stanford was one of them. Researchers at the world-renowned university had a working test by February, based on protocols published by the W.H.O. The organization had already delivered more than 250,000 of the German-designed tests to 70 laboratories around the world, and doctors at the Stanford lab wanted to be prepared for a pandemic.

“Even if it didn’t come, it would be better to be ready than not to be ready,” said Dr. Benjamin Pinsky, the lab’s medical director.

Confused by the terms about coronavirus testing? Let us help:

But in the face of what he called “relatively tight” rules at the F.D.A., Dr. Pinsky and his colleagues decided against even trying to win permission. The Stanford clinical lab would not begin testing coronavirus samples until early March, when Dr. Hahn finally relaxed the rules.

Executives at bioMérieux, a French diagnostics company, had a similar experience. The company makes a countertop testing system, BioFire, that is routinely used to check for the flu and other respiratory illnesses in 1,700 hospitals around the country. It can provide results in about 45 minutes.

“A lot of us said, you know, your typical E.U.A. is just much too demanding,” said Dr. Mark Miller, the company’s chief medical officer, referring to the emergency approval. “It’s going to take much too much time. And can’t you do something to shorten that?”

Officials at the F.D.A. tried to be responsive, Dr. Miller said. But rather than throw out the rules, the agency only modified the regulatory requirements, still requiring weeks of discussions and negotiations.

After conversations with the F.D.A. in mid-February, the company received emergency approval for its BioFire test on March 24. (The company also began talking to the F.D.A. in January about another type of test, but decided not to pursue it in the United States for now.) Dr. Miller said that while he was ultimately satisfied with the F.D.A.’s actions, the overall response by the government was too slow, especially when it came to logistical questions like getting enough testing supplies to those who needed them.

“You’ve got other countries — and I’m sorry, unfortunately, the U.S. is one of those — where they’ve been slow, disorganized,” he said. “There are still not enough tests available there to test everybody who needs it.”

In an emailed statement, Dr. Hahn maintained that his agency had moved as quickly as it safely could to ensure that tests would be accurate. “Since the early days of this pandemic,” he said, “the F.D.A.’s doors have always been and still remain open to test developers.”

Alex Azar had sounded confident at the end of January. At a news conference in the hulking H.H.S. headquarters in Washington, he said he had the government’s response to the new coronavirus under control, pointing out high-ranking jobs he had held in the department during the 2003 SARS outbreak and other infectious threats.

“I know this playbook well,” he told reporters.

A Yale-trained lawyer who once served as the top attorney at the health department, Mr. Azar had spent a decade as a top executive at Eli Lilly, one of the world’s largest drug companies. But he caught Mr. Trump’s attention in part because of other credentials: After law school, Mr. Azar was a clerk for some of the nation’s most conservative judges, including Justice Antonin Scalia of the Supreme Court. And for two years, he worked as Ken Starr’s deputy on the Clinton Whitewater investigation.

As Mr. Trump’s second health secretary, confirmed at the beginning of 2018, Mr. Azar has been quick to compliment the president and focus on the issues he cares about: lowering drug prices and fighting opioid addiction. On Feb. 6 — even as the W.H.O. announced that there were more than 28,000 coronavirus cases around the globe — Mr. Azar was in the second row in the White House’s East Room, demonstrating his loyalty to the president as Mr. Trump claimed vindication from his impeachment acquittal the day before and lashed out at “evil” lawmakers and the F.B.I.’s “top scum.”

As public attention on the virus threat intensified in January and February, Mr. Azar grew increasingly frustrated about the harsh spotlight on his department and the leaders of agencies who reported to him, according to people familiar with the response to the virus inside the agencies.

Described as a prickly boss by some administration officials, Mr. Azar has had a longstanding feud with Seema Verma, the Medicare and Medicaid chief, who recently became a regular presence at Mr. Trump’s televised briefings on the pandemic. Mr. Azar did not include Dr. Hahn on the virus task force he led, though some of the F.D.A. commissioner’s aides participated in H.H.S. meetings on the subject.

And tensions grew between the secretary and Dr. Redfield as the testing issue persisted. Mr. Azar and Dr. Redfield have been on the phone as often as a half-dozen times a day. But throughout February, as the C.D.C. test faltered, Mr. Azar became convinced that Dr. Redfield’s agency was providing him with inaccurate information about testing that the secretary repeated publicly, according to several administration officials.

In one instance, Mr. Azar appeared on Sunday morning news programs and said that more than 3,600 people had been tested for the virus. In fact, the real number was much smaller because many patients were tested multiple times, an error the C.D.C. had to correct in congressional testimony that week. One health department official said Mr. Azar was repeatedly assured that the C.D.C.’s test would be widely available within a week or 10 days, only to be given the same promise a week later.

Asked about criticism of his agency’s response to the pandemic, Dr. Redfield said: “I’m personally not focused on whether they’re pointing fingers here or there. We’re focused on doing all we can to get through this outbreak as quickly as possible and keep America safe.”

For all Mr. Azar’s complaints, however, he continued to defer to the scientists at the two agencies, according to several administration officials. Mr. Azar’s allies said he was told by Dr. Redfield and Dr. Fauci that the C.D.C. had the resources it needed, that there was no reason to believe the virus was spreading through the country from person to person and that it was important to test only people who met certain criteria.

But even in the face of a crescendo of complaints from doctors and health care researchers around the country, Mr. Azar failed to push those under him to do the one thing that could have helped: broader testing.

In a statement, Caitlin Oakley, Mr. Azar’s spokeswoman, said that the secretary had “empowered and followed the guidance of world-renowned U.S. scientists” on the testing issue. “Any insinuation that Secretary Azar did not respond with needed urgency to the response or testing efforts,” she said, “are just plain wrong and disproven by the facts.”

By Feb. 26, Dr. Fauci was concerned that the stalled testing had become an urgent issue that needed to be addressed. He called Brian Harrison, Mr. Azar’s chief of staff, and asked him to gather the group of officials overseeing screening efforts.

Around noon on Feb. 27, Dr. Hahn, Dr. Redfield and top aides from the F.D.A. and H.H.S. dialed in to a conference call. Mr. Harrison began with an ultimatum: No one leaves until we resolve the lag in testing. We don’t have answers and we need them, one senior administration official recalled him saying. Get it done.

By the end of the day, the group agreed that the F.D.A. should loosen regulations so that hospitals and independent labs could move forward quickly with their own tests.

But the evening before, Mr. Azar had been effectively removed as the leader of the task force when Mr. Trump abruptly put Mr. Pence in charge, a decision so last-minute that even the top health officials in the White House learned of it while watching the announcement.

Previous presidents have moved quickly to confront disease threats from inside the White House by installing a “czar” to manage the effort.

During an outbreak of the Ebola virus in 2014, President Barack Obama tapped Ron Klain, his vice president’s former chief of staff, to direct the response from the West Wing. Mr. Obama later created an office of global health security inside the National Security Council to coordinate future crises.

“If you look historically in the United States when it is challenged with something like this — whether it’s H.I.V. crises, whether it’s pandemic, whether it’s whatever — man, they pull out all the stops across the system and they make it work,” said Dr. Aylward, the W.H.O. epidemiologist.

But faced with the coronavirus, Mr. Trump chose not to have the White House lead the planning until nearly two months after it began. Mr. Obama’s global health office had been disbanded a year earlier. And until Mr. Pence took charge, the task force lacked a single White House official with the power to compel action.

Since then, testing has ramped up quickly, with nearly 100 labs at hospitals and elsewhere performing it. On Friday, the health care giant Abbott said it had received emergency approval for a portable test that could detect the virus in five minutes.

The president boasted on Tuesday that the United States had “created a new system that now we are doing unbelievably big numbers” of tests for the virus. The U.S., he said, had done more testing for the coronavirus in the last eight days than South Korea had done in eight weeks.

Yet hospitals and clinics across the country still must deny tests to those with milder symptoms, trying to save them for the most serious cases, and they often wait a week for results. In tacit acknowledgment of the shortage, Mr. Trump asked South Korea’s president on Monday to send as many test kits as possible from the 100,000 produced there daily, more than the country needs.

Public health experts reacted positively to the increased capacity. But having the ability to diagnose the disease three months after it was first disclosed by China does little to address why the United States was unable to do so sooner, when it might have helped reduce the toll of the pandemic.

“Testing is the crack that split apart the rest of the response, when it should have tied everything together,” said Dr. Nahid Bhadelia, ​the medical director of the Special Pathogens Unit at Boston University School of Medicine.

“It seeps into every other aspect of our response, touches all of us,” she said. “The delay of the testing has impacted the response across the board.”

Eric Lipton contributed reporting from Washington and Choe Sang-Hun from Seoul, South Korea.

<|endoftext|>

— Caroline Criado Perez, author of “Invisible Women”

[In Her Words is available as a newsletter. Sign up here to get it delivered to your inbox.]

As the novel coronavirus sweeps the world, sickening hundreds of thousands of people and killing at least 50,000 individuals to date, scientists have learned more and more about it. We know that older adults — aged 60 and above — are at greater risk of dying from it. And, based on data from China, Italy and South Korea, we also know that men seem to have higher fatality rates.

But in the U.S., where ramped-up testing is churning out reams of data by the minute, there’s one thing we’re not monitoring: the sex breakdown. How many women are infected versus men? Are men and women equally likely to get infected? What is the fatality rate for each sex? Are symptoms exactly alike for men and women?

The latest update on cases and deaths in the U.S. from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention contained no mention of male and female patients. When asked why, a spokesperson for the C.D.C. said the agency simply does “not have that information to share at this time” and “additional investigation is needed.” Even The Times’s case tracker, which was made public last week and provides county-level data, has no sex breakdown because that information isn’t consistently available across states and counties.

“We can confidently say from the data from many countries that being male is a risk factor,” said Sabra Klein, a scientist at Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health who studies sex difference in viral infections. “That, in and of itself should be evidence for why every country should be disaggregating their data. But the United States isn’t doing it.”

This kind of information — or lack thereof — matters because men and women are likely to have fundamentally different reactions to the virus, vaccines and treatment, health experts say. Indeed, research has shown that the SARS, influenza, Ebola and HIV viruses all affect men and women differently.

“Researchers have found sex differences in every tissue and organ system in the human body,” including the immune system, writes Caroline Criado Perez in her award-winning book “Invisible Women.” 

A recent research paper from Huazhong University of Science and Technology in Wuhan, China, backs that up: Scientists studied the plasma of 331 confirmed coronavirus patients and found that in the most severe cases, women had a higher level of antibodies than men. Though the paper hasn’t been peer-reviewed, it provides yet another reason to capture sex data. 

Despite this, the coronavirus vaccine trials underway in the U.S. aren’t really considering sex yet, said Dr. Klein.

The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease — a part of the National Institutes of Health — is already running phase one trials of a potential vaccine on 45 healthy adults. The purpose of phase one trials is to “learn about safety and identify side effects,” according to the agency’s website. It is also at this stage that researchers determine the correct dosage for a vaccine. 

But the trials of this vaccine will only explore age and sex “as part of subgroup analysis” because “a larger number of participants would be needed to conduct a meaningful analysis of sex and age differences,” the agency said in a statement. 

“N.I.A.I.D. is developing plans for potential larger-scale clinical trials,” the statement continued.

This approach can be dangerous. Between 1998 and 2000, women represented just 22 percent of initial small-scale safety trials for new drug applications submitted to the F.D.A., according to the U.S. Government Accountability Office. The same agency also found that 8 of the 10 F.D.A.-approved drugs that were withdrawn from the market between 1997 and 2001 “posed greater health risks for women than men,” including causing valvular heart disease and liver failure.

On the other hand, Johnson & Johnson, which is pushing to get clinical trials of a vaccine started by September, said it would analyze data by sex and age from phase one onward.

Sex data blind spots can be traced back to the fact that, historically, science didn’t study the female body. 

“It’s been assumed that there wasn’t anything fundamentally different between male and female bodies other than size and reproductive function,” writes Perez, so anything that deviates from the “default’ — a white, male archetype — is considered an anomaly. Moreover, researchers often argue that the female body is “too complex” to be studied, with its “fluctuating, ‘atypical’ hormones.” 

As a result, for years women have been underrepresented in medical research, clinical trials for drugs and vaccines, and biology textbooks. Even in 2015, in one of the tests of the so-called “female Viagra” — a product clearly designed for women — scientists tried out the drug on 23 men and two women, writes Perez.

In 1990, the National Institutes of Health established the Office of Research on Women’s Health. And in 1993, U.S. lawmakers required the N.I.H. to include more women and minorities in clinical research and trials. 

But the N.I.H. has been slow to enforce those rules. A 2015 report by the Government Accountability Office found that though more women than men were enrolled in trials overall from 2005 to 2014, it was unclear whether women were sufficiently represented in all research areas, leaving open the possibility that they may still have been underrepresented in some studies. 

And in 2016, the O.R.W.H. noted that preclinical trials on animals still “rely heavily on male animals and/or omit reporting of the sex,” and added that all researchers applying for funding from 2017 onward must provide a “strong justification” for studying just one sex.

But these regulations only apply to federally funded research, which in 2015 accounted for 22 percent of total spending on medical and health research, according to a think tank that advocates increased funding for R&D.

“These notions that ‘I’ve never done this for any other clinical trial. Why am I going to do this today?’ — these things get ingrained,” said Dr. Klein, and so any shift in procedure and culture “is perceived as an added complication.”

Obscuring any sex differences in studies and test results can have vast ramifications. “The moment we started to sex-disaggregate data during the 2009 H1N1 pandemic, we picked up pretty quickly that pregnant women were an at-risk population,” said Dr. Klein, and so “they were some of the first people to be offered the pandemic flu vaccine.” Today, we don’t know very much about the impact of Covid-19 on pregnant women.

“It’s not a lot upfront to get that information, but the systems are often not set up to actually collect the information,” said Dyan Mazurana, a research professor who studies humanitarian crises at Tufts University and an author of a recent report about sex-disaggregated data. “And then what you need is people who can analyze and interpret that data.”

Having this data also comes down to those in charge, said Dr. Klein. 

The White House’s initial 12-person Coronavirus Task Force was entirely male. Then in February, two women were added to the mix: Dr. Deborah Birx, who coordinates the government’s response to the pandemic, and Seema Verma, the administrator of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.

At one White House briefing, Dr. Birx noted the gaping gender disparity in deaths in Italy, but that data still isn’t available for the U.S.

“Everybody is doing the best they can in these times, but if it is not on somebody’s radar who has the power to get the data out there, you’re just not going to see it,” said Dr. Klein.

In Her Words is written by Alisha Haridasani Gupta and edited by Francesca Donner. Our art director is Catherine Gilmore-Barnes, and our photo editor is Sandra Stevenson. 

Did someone forward you this email? Sign up here to get future installments. You can also follow us on Instagram or email us at inherwords@nytimes.com. 





<|endoftext|>

After 22 days in the hospital, fighting for his life, Mark Frilot is going home.

A 45-year-old Louisianian with no underlying health conditions, he tested positive for coronavirus on March 14, after a week of body aches, hallucination-inducing fevers, and a misdiagnosis of flu. For much of his time in the hospital, he relied entirely on a ventilator. On March 27, he was able to take his first breaths without it.

By Thursday, doctors informed Mr. Frilot’s wife, Heaven, that he was ready to be discharged. His final test for coronavirus had come back negative, they said — and he was free to finish his physical therapy at home with his family.

For the past three weeks, Ms. Frilot (pronounced FREE-low) has been quarantined at home with the couple’s 10-year-old son, Ethan. As her husband was in the hospital, Ms. Frilot found herself serving as something of an interpreter for her conservative community in Kenner, La., about the severity of the illness. Some, citing right-wing media figures like Rush Limbaugh, had waved the virus off as unserious. Friends and strangers alike who heard of her story, whether via Facebook or media reports, sent food, toys for Ethan, and messages saying that Mr. Frilot’s diagnosis had opened their eyes to the reality of the pandemic.

Mr. Frilot was East Jefferson General Hospital’s first positive case of the coronavirus. Louisiana has rapidly become an epicenter of the virus, with the Louisiana Department of Health reporting 10,297 confirmed cases on Friday; Jefferson Parish, where the Frilots live, accounts for 2,495 of those cases. State officials have blamed the federal government for not directing them to shut down Mardi Gras festivities, which most likely fueled the outbreak in New Orleans and surrounding cities.

Ms. Frilot will probably never know where her husband contracted the virus, but she noted that the family had briefly attended a Mardi Gras parade in Kenner in the week before his symptoms began.

On Friday afternoon, Ms. Frilot drove to the hospital to see her husband for the first time since she took him to the emergency room three weeks ago. She planned to sit in on his final physical and occupational therapy session so she could learn how to help him continue his recovery at home.

Mr. Frilot was equally eager for her to arrive, she said in a text message. “Mark’s been calling me every hour saying, ‘Are you on your way yet?’” She sent a happy-face emoji.



<|endoftext|>

In Lodi, Calif., a man wearing a “tactical-type vest” stopped a man in a park and told him he was violating curfew and needed to hand over $1,000 or go to jail.

In Erie, Colo., a man with flashing lights in his car pulled over a woman driving to work and told her she was violating a stay-at-home order. He followed her back to her house and then drove off.

In Jackson County, Ga., a man with a blue light on his dashboard who was sporting a pin-on badge pulled over the driver of a dump truck, identified himself as a deputy sheriff and told the driver to get off the road because he was a nonessential employee.

Across the country, police impersonators are exploiting the restrictions imposed during the coronavirus pandemic to conduct illegal traffic stops. Some have harassed women and others have tried to steal money or personal information, according to law enforcement officials.

“They’re wannabe police officers, and the coronavirus is making it easier for them to do it,” said Janis G. Mangum, the sheriff in Jackson County. “They’re up to no good and it bothers me a lot.”

In many cases, the perpetrators are preying on the vulnerability and the fear people feel as the virus continues to spread rapidly, said Marcus Felson, a professor of criminal justice at Texas State University.

“I argue strongly for opportunity being the driving force in crime, and this is a crime of opportunity,” Dr. Felson said.

Academic research has also indicated that the increasing regulation of civilian life and greater police powers — like those enacted after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks — make it easier for police impersonators to operate.

“The more we regulate, the more opportunity it opens for people who want to capitalize on it for their own selfish purposes,” said Robert Gellately, a historian at Florida State University who has written about police impersonators in Nazi Germany. “It’s disgusting.”

In some cases where drivers were allowed to leave after being stopped briefly, there appears to have been no clear motive other than a desire to wield the power of the badge for personal satisfaction, the police said.

In Jackson County, for example, the man who identified himself as a deputy sheriff let the driver of the dump truck go without asking for his ID or demanding any money, Sheriff Mangum said.

She said the police were investigating whether the bogus traffic stop might be linked to at least two similar incidents of police impersonation in Gainesville, Ga., and Dawson County, Ga.

A 2012 study of 56 incidents of police impersonation found that the perpetrators fell into three general categories: Many were “common crooks” looking for a quick shakedown; a few were “cop wannabes” attracted to the authority and ego of policing; and several were driven by “uncommon compulsions” — impersonating officers to engage in sexual misconduct.

Callie Rennison, a professor at the University of Colorado Denver, who helped to conduct the study, said impersonating a police officer was easy because it required little more than a few basic tools of law enforcement like a flashing blue light or a Ford Crown Victoria.

“It all came down to power and control — having those symbols and people obeying it,” she said. “It’s terrible for legitimate police officers because it undermines their authority.”

The police recommend that drivers should call 911 if they fear they’ve been stopped by a bogus law enforcement officer, because dispatchers can determine if the stop is legitimate. They also recommend stopping in a well-lit, public area and turning on the hazard lights to draw the attention of passing motorists. Drivers can also ask to see a badge or an identification card.

Officer Hettie Stillman, a spokeswoman for the Lodi Police Department in California’s Central Valley, said the victim who was approached in a park refused to pay the police impersonator $1,000. The victim was Hispanic, she said, which made her concerned that the city’s large Pakistani and Latino populations could be targeted by ersatz officers claiming to enforce coronavirus restrictions.

“Anybody and anyone that would be vulnerable in these times can be taken advantage of, especially if their country of origin doesn’t have a strong relationship with law enforcement,” Officer Stillman said.

Several of the recent incidents took place in Colorado, and the police there said it was too early to determine whether they might be linked.

Around midnight on March 25 in Aurora, Colo., a woman was pulled over by a Ford Crown Victoria with red and blue lights. The police said the driver, a young man wearing a dark blue uniform, walked up to the woman’s car and “asked why she was out during the stay-at-home order due to Covid-19,” the disease caused by the coronavirus. She noticed he didn’t have a badge and, after a brief conversation, the man told her she could leave.

A day later in Fort Collins, Colo., a woman was pulled over by a man wearing a blue police uniform and driving a pickup truck with red and blue lights. He told the woman he was performing a “stay-home compliance check,” and ordered her to hand over her driver’s license, proof of insurance and registration, which he took back to his truck and then returned to her several minutes later, the police said.

The following day in Greeley, Colo., a police impersonator pulled drivers into an area blocked off by yellow traffic cones. The man, who was wearing a dark uniform with a traffic vest, had a baton and pepper spray and was asking for driver’s licenses, insurance and registration. He demanded that one driver explain why he was “violating the Covid-19 law,” according to the police.

John Feyen, the assistant chief in Fort Collins, said that while officers there were still enforcing traffic laws, they were not stopping cars solely for restrictions related to the coronavirus.

“Unfortunately, criminals around the country are using Covid-19 concerns to their advantage in many ways,” he said. “We will hold these people accountable for their illegal activities and encourage our community members to report any suspicious behaviors.”

<|endoftext|>

— A new study by researchers at Northwestern University, the University of Mannheim in Germany and the University of California, San Diego.

[In Her Words is available as a newsletter. Sign up here to get it delivered to your inbox.]

Today is Equal Pay Day, which represents just how much further into the calendar year American women would have to work to earn what their male counterparts made last year.

Women in the United States who work full time, year-round, earn on average 82 cents for every dollar that a man earns, according to Census Bureau data analyzed by the American Association of University Women. Women of color fare far worse: Black women earn 62 cents on the dollar and Hispanic women 54 cents.

This year, as a pandemic cripples the economy, these inequities will come into sharp focus, as many women confront the coronavirus on the front lines or lose their jobs because of the economic downturn. 

The crisis may also make the inequities worse — at least in the short term, according to a new paper examining the impact of the virus on the economy by researchers at Northwestern University, the University of Mannheim in Germany and the University of California, San Diego.

“The Covid-19 pandemic will have a disproportionate negative effect on women and their employment opportunities,” the authors write.

However, the paper suggests that the shift in workplace culture and increased flexibility — catalyzed by Covid-19 — may also promote gender equality in the long run.

I spoke with Matthias Doepke, an economics professor at Northwestern University and one of the authors of the research paper, to explain the economic consequences of the virus for women and what the recovery might look like.The interview has been shortened and edited for clarity.

In our paper, we look at how the current downturn is different from a regular recession.

We know that regular recessions have an uneven impact on women and men, but in the opposite direction. In all major recessions, including the financial recession 10 years ago, many more men lose their jobs. This has to do with two things: Usually the most affected sectors are things like construction and manufacturing, which are male-dominated. And the second thing is this notion of “insurance in the family,” that some married women decide to actually work more during a recession to make up for the job loss of the husband.

But in this downturn, already you can see that it’s quite different. The sectors that are going to be most affected — for example, the restaurants, which are all closed, or the travel sector — have fairly high female employment. More women will lose jobs.

But the much bigger thing for most people who live with children is the extra child care needs — everybody with young kids has to provide all of the child care all of a sudden. And we argue that the vast majority of this extra work will fall on women, therefore making it difficult for them to work as usual.

Big crises have the potential to bring about cultural change. World War II was a bit like that because, for the first time, many married women with children joined the labor force, and there’s a lot of research showing this had a really persistent impact on social norms.

There’s some potential for that here from two quite different perspectives. One is from the perspective of the employers. Many businesses are adopting work-from-home policies, and that’s going to stick. These businesses are going to invest in the technology, they’re going to learn how to do this, they’re going to see that there’s some advantage to this. And we expect that this added flexibility is going to stay — not completely — but to a large extent after the crisis. It’s really a benefit to everybody, to all families, but given that right now mothers bear the burden of child care, in a relative sense, they’re going to benefit from that.

The other side of this is the cultural norms side. Whenever you look at the division of labor in the household, it’s really not just that whoever earns more works more. A lot has to do with cultural expectations. For example, in couples where the wives may have a higher income than the husbands, they often still do the majority of the child care.

So even though on average women will do most of this additional child care right now, for many couples it’s going to be the other way around, probably for the first time. If the wife works in medicine, for example, or in some other essential sector where she can’t work from home, then just by necessity the father will be the main provider of child care.

Research does suggest that even these temporary changes have quite a persistent effect. We cite a study from Spain where they introduced a leave specifically for fathers, just two weeks, to take care of a newborn child, and found that men ended up doing more of the child care in the future.

One thing we would like to have seen, which we would argue is better than paying for unemployment, is to essentially subsidize keeping employment ongoing. So that’s a system where essentially you tell firms that if you keep these employees and reduce the hours, the government will then make up a large fraction of lost income. It’s a way of preserving employment so that when the crisis is over, the workers can go right back to work. This is something that Germany did in the financial recession in 2008, and you see that the employment losses there were much, much smaller than, for example, in the United States.

59 cents 

The amount women earned for every dollar a man earned in 1963, when the Equal Pay Act was passed. It took almost three decades for that to tick up to roughly 70 cents, in the 1990s, according to the National Committee on Pay Equity.

2059 

The year that the gender pay gap is expected to close in the U.S., according to analysts at the Institute for Women’s Policy Research.

$407,760 

The amount a woman will lose because of the current pay gap over a 40-year career, according to the National Women’s Law Center.

66 

The percentage of people in the low-wage work force who are women, according to the National Women’s Law Center.

In Her Words is written by Alisha Haridasani Gupta and edited by Francesca Donner. Our art director is Catherine Gilmore-Barnes, and our photo editor is Sandra Stevenson. 

Did someone forward you this email? Sign up here to get future installments. You can also follow us on Instagram or email us at inherwords@nytimes.com. 





<|endoftext|>

AUSTIN, Texas — Two weeks ago, amid the coronavirus pandemic, about 70 students from the University of Texas at Austin partied in Mexico on spring break. The students, all in their 20s, flew on a chartered plane to Cabo San Lucas, and some returned on separate commercial flights to Texas.

Now, 44 of them have tested positive for the virus and are self-isolating. More students were monitored and tested on Wednesday, university officials said, after 28 initial positive tests.

The Austin outbreak is the latest to result from a group of college students who ignored social-distancing guidelines, went on traditional spring break trips and have now tested positive for the coronavirus. Many of them appeared to be under the mistaken impression that young people are not as likely to get the coronavirus as older people are. Students at the University of Tampa, the University of Wisconsin-Madison and other colleges have tested positive after returning from spring break trips to Florida, Alabama, Tennessee and elsewhere.

The defiant attitude, at a time when millions of Americans were hunkered down at home and staying away from school, work and relatives, was embodied by Brady Sluder, a young man on spring break in Miami who declared from a packed beach: “If I get corona, I get corona. At the end of the day, I’m not going to let it stop me from partying.” Mr. Sluder, whose television interview was shared widely, later apologized on Instagram.

In Austin, health officials with the city government and the university have contacted every young person who was on the chartered plane, using flight manifests shared by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the authorities said. City health officials used the case to urge residents of all ages to stay home and to avoid nonessential travel. At least four of the 44 students who tested positive had not shown any symptoms of the coronavirus.

“The virus often hides in the healthy and is given to those who are at grave risk of being hospitalized or dying,” Dr. Mark E. Escott, the interim medical director and health authority for the city of Austin and Travis County, said in a statement. “While younger people have less risk for complications, they are not immune from severe illness and death from Covid-19,” the disease caused by the coronavirus.

U.T. Austin canceled classes on March 13 and resumed instruction online on Monday.

“The incident is a very strong reminder of the importance of taking seriously the warnings of public health authorities on the risks of Covid-19,” said J.B. Bird, director of media relations at the university.

The state’s flagship university has been hit hard by the virus. Its president, Gregory L. Fenves, announced last month that his wife had tested positive, and that his family was self-isolating. Mr. Fenves’s wife, Carmel, began exhibiting flulike symptoms after the couple traveled to New York City for events with alumni and students. Mr. Fenves’s tests later came back negative.

The group of roughly 70 students departed from the Austin airport on March 14 and many of them returned on March 19. The trip was organized by a company called JusCollege, which bills itself as a “one-stop shop” for spring break and college-oriented trips.

“I’m not going to judge those students’ decision,” said Camron I. Goodman, 24, the university’s student government president. “A lot of students had to make some tough decisions about their spring break plans.”

Updated Dec. 18, 2020

The latest on how the pandemic is reshaping education.

On Wednesday, JusCollege’s website still included an event listing for “Cabo Spring Break 2020” from Feb. 23 to April 10. “Join us as we take over Cabo San Lucas for Spring Break 2020!” the listing reads. “Place your deposit to lock in best pricing.”

The Austin television station KVUE posted emails that the company sent to students in the days before the trip, assuring them that spring break was still on and was still safe.

One of the emails, sent by the company on March 3, read, “We believe that our travel destinations remain among the safest and most enjoyable places in the world to visit right now.” In another, sent on March 12, the company wrote that “we’re currently in our 2nd week of Cabo and have had almost 5,000 travelers, all with no issues.”

A statement later posted on JusCollege’s website told travelers that the remaining spring break trips were being postponed until a later date in 2020. “We are committed to building solutions that connect people and provide safety and security for our community while sustaining our love of adventure,” the company’s statement read.

David Montgomery reported from Austin, and Manny Fernandez from Houston.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the nation’s leading expert on infectious diseases, who has become a regular at President Trump’s coronavirus briefings, will receive enhanced personal security after receiving threats following his repeated pleas for Americans to help slow the spread of the deadly pandemic, officials said on Wednesday.

Dr. Fauci has been the Trump administration’s most outspoken advocate of social distancing rules that have shuttered the nation’s schools, forced businesses to close, kept people in their homes and battered the United States economy.

That has made him a target of online conspiracy theorists who have accused Dr. Fauci, a longtime scientist and civil servant who has served presidents of both parties, of trying to undermine Mr. Trump during a year in which the president is fighting for re-election.

The Department of Health and Human Services granted the enhanced personal security for Dr. Fauci, 79, after the Justice Department signed off on a request for extra agents to guard him, officials said. Alex M. Azar II, the health and human services secretary, had grown worried that the threats against the doctor were increasing as more of the country shut down in response to the coronavirus.

“Yesterday, upon the recommendation of the U.S. Marshals Service, the department approved the special deputization request from H.H.S. for nine H.H.S.-O.I.G. special agents to provide protective services for Dr. Fauci,” the Justice Department said in a statement, referring to the Office of the Inspector General at the health department. The Washington Post first reported the news of the enhanced security.

 

Caitlin Oakley, a spokeswoman for the health department, would not confirm Dr. Fauci’s enhanced security but called him “an integral part of the U.S. government’s response against Covid-19,” referring to the disease caused by the coronavirus.

“Among other efforts,” she added, “he is leading the development of a Covid-19 vaccine and he regularly appears at White House press briefings and media interviews.”

The coronavirus could kill 100,000 to more than 200,000 Americans in the coming weeks. Dr. Fauci, along with a fellow task force member, Dr. Deborah L. Birx, encouraged Mr. Trump to extend the amount of time that the country would remain shuttered through the end of this month. Some states, like Virginia, have issued stay-at-home orders that do not expire until further into the spring.

The idea that Dr. Fauci is responsible for the country’s hardship — and for whatever political damage Mr. Trump might suffer as a result — was fueled in part by a moment during a news briefing in which Dr. Fauci dropped his head and touched his forehead as the president was speaking. The image went viral online and right-wing supporters of Mr. Trump cited it as evidence that Dr. Fauci sought to undercut the president.

One anti-Fauci Twitter post last week said, “Sorry liberals but we don’t trust Dr. Anthony Fauci.”

The hashtag #FauciFraud has been used by more than 70 Twitter accounts, some posting hundreds of times a day, according to an analysis by The New York Times. Criticism of Dr. Fauci has also come from leading conservative voices and supporters of Mr. Trump, including Tom Fitton, the president of Judicial Watch, a conservative group; Bill Mitchell, the host of the far-right online talk show “YourVoice America”; and Shiva Ayyadurai, who has falsely claimed to be the inventor of email.

But Mr. Trump himself has praised the doctor. During Wednesday’s briefing, when a reporter asked about Dr. Fauci’s personal security, the president said: “He doesn’t need security. Everybody loves him.”

In fact, Dr. Fauci has earned plaudits from many medical experts and public health officials for his often grim assessment of the threats facing the United States from the coronavirus — even sometimes contradicting the president’s rosier outlook.

For weeks, Dr. Fauci’s remarks on television and at the White House stood in sharp contrast to the commentary from Mr. Trump’s fiercest supporters on Fox News, whose leading hosts repeatedly claimed that Democrats, the news media and public health experts were inflating the threat of the virus.

After the viral video of Dr. Fauci lowering his head, online attacks against him increased. A seven-year-old email that he wrote to an aide of former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s was posted online by The American Thinker, a conservative blog. In the email, Dr. Fauci praised Mrs. Clinton for her stamina during hearings into the 2012 attacks on the American compound in Benghazi, Libya. The blog suggested falsely that the email proved that Dr. Fauci was part of a secret group who opposed Mr. Trump.

Ironically, in the past several days, the president has largely adopted Dr. Fauci’s more dire warnings about the dangers of the rapidly spreading virus. On Tuesday, Mr. Trump called it a “great national trial unlike any we have ever faced before” and echoed Dr. Fauci’s language about the need to minimize its spread.

“It’s a matter of life and death, frankly,” Mr. Trump said, offering a sober assessment of the pandemic’s effect. “It’s a matter of life and death.”

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — There were just 160 documented cases of the coronavirus in the United States when Representative Raul Ruiz, Democrat of California, told Vice President Mike Pence in a closed-door meeting that President Trump needed to “think about declaring a national emergency.” It took nine more days for Mr. Trump to do so.

That was in early March. A month earlier, Representative Phil Roe, Republican of Tennessee, concluded that the Diamond Princess, a cruise ship, was a “viral petri dish” for the coronavirus. He badgered top federal health officials until the Trump administration eventually evacuated Americans from the ship.

Senator Bill Cassidy, Republican of Louisiana, also watched the spread of coronavirus with alarm. He is now seeking an audience with Mr. Pence to push several ideas, including the creation of a national “immunity registry” for Covid-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus, that would collect data from widespread blood testing to determine who could safely return to work.

The senator and the congressmen share a common background: all are medical doctors, part of a small corps of roughly two dozen health professionals in Congress, many of whom were sounding the alarm about the coming pandemic back when Mr. Trump was still calling criticism of his administration’s response a “hoax.” Now, with more than 275,000 Americans infected and 7,000 dead from Covid-19, the doctors of Congress are drawing on their expertise to push for more aggressive federal measures to cope with the disease.

The doctor-turned-lawmaker who garnered the most attention in recent weeks was Senator Rand Paul, Republican of Kentucky and an eye surgeon, who drew widespread derision for going about his business — including exercising in a shuttered Senate gym — while quietly awaiting test results for Covid-19 after having been exposed to someone who was infected. He later learned he was positive, which sent some of his colleagues, including Dr. Cassidy, into quarantine.

But others have been trying — sometimes in vain — to put their training to use. The first coronavirus hearing in Congress was convened by a Democratic doctor from California, Representative Ami Bera, on Feb. 5, before the disease it caused even had a name.

Mr. Trump had imposed a ban on travel from China just days earlier. But Dr. Bera, the former chief medical officer for Sacramento County, said he was concerned at the time about the lack of “a clear command control structure” inside the White House, and felt the travel ban was an inadequate response.

“We were sounding the alarms,” he said, recounting his message: “The travel ban on China wasn’t going to stop this virus. It was going to buy us time, but this virus is coming to the United States.”

Now that it is here in full force, a bipartisan trio of doctors — Dr. Cassidy, a gastroenterologist with expertise in immunization; Dr. Ruiz, an emergency room doctor with a master’s degree in public health; and Representative Kim Schrier, Democrat of Washington and a pediatrician — are collaborating on what Dr. Ruiz called “a three-point immediate triage response for mass production and restocking” of medical supplies and equipment, including much-needed masks and ventilators.

The idea, all three said in interviews, is to have a centralized command structure, anchored inside the White House, to manage production and distribution. Ventilators and other equipment would be shipped across the country based on data about where outbreaks were emerging. If, for example, Des Moines had 5,000 ventilators but few cases of coronavirus, those machines could be sent to New York, with the promise that New York or other cities would supply Des Moines when that city was in need.

With distribution of a coronavirus vaccine beginning in the U.S., here are answers to some questions you may be wondering about:

“We need a way to get out of the mess we’re currently in, and I think this is part of the solution,” Dr. Cassidy said in an interview. He also outlined his idea for the immunity registry, which he said would be akin to “vaccine registries” maintained by schools.

Not all of Congress’ doctors, however, are so actively engaged. In a brief interview in the Capitol before his diagnosis became public, Mr. Paul insisted that he had little relevant expertise: “I am a physician,” he said. “I’m aware of science, I’m able to read scientific papers and I think, make judgments. But I don’t put myself out as an expert.”

Others, like Dr. Schrier, the only female doctor in Congress, have simply been trying to keep their colleagues and constituents well. Dr. Schrier recounted how, after coronavirus cases first appeared in the United States but before social distancing became a household phrase, she watched in horror as her colleagues were still coughing into their hands and sharing fruit and other food, including with Representative John Lewis, the civil rights icon who is batting pancreatic cancer.

“They did a birthday party for John Lewis with a cake,” she said, sounding incredulous. “I pulled my friends aside and said, ‘You can’t do this with an 80-year-old whose immune system is already compromised.’”

There are 17 doctors in Congress — 14 in the House and three in the Senate — as well as three dentists, two nurses, a pharmacist and a former health secretary, Representative Donna E. Shalala, Democrat of Florida, who served under President Bill Clinton. The group is overwhelmingly white, male and Republican. Only the two nurses and three of the doctors are Democrats. The Republican doctors have their own group, the G.O.P. Doctors Caucus.

This being Washington, party affiliation tends to color their views of how the president has handled the crisis. Representative Neal Dunn, Republican of Florida and a urologist, organized a classified briefing for members of the doctors caucus in early February, he said, to dispel conspiracy theories that coronavirus was a biological weapon. Dr. Dunn, who also served as a surgeon in the military, said he was not troubled by Mr. Trump’s early attempts to play down the disease.

“I think what he was saying is, ‘Don’t panic, this is a flu, Americans are largely not at risk,’” Dr. Neal said, echoing Mr. Trump’s language as he deemed the federal response “unprecedented, unlike any response in history.”

Representative Mark E. Green, Republican of Tennessee and a retired Army flight surgeon, said much the same: “The president, I admit, was trying to create calm as a leader should — he was saying it’s like flu.”

The Democrats, not surprisingly, have been far more critical. Dr. Ruiz was one of four Democrats selected by leadership to question Mr. Pence when the vice president came to the Capitol on March 4 to brief lawmakers privately. The congressman said he had been frustrated to see Mr. Trump “downplay and deny” the emerging threat, and that Mr. Pence offered no response to the suggestion that the president declare a national emergency.

And Dr. Ruiz was so irked by the administration’s early failure to put out public service announcements that he donned a white lab coat and made his own. They are posted on his website.

Representative Lauren Underwood, Democrat of Illinois and a nurse who worked in pandemic preparedness for the Obama administration, said she drew on her knowledge of federal laws and rules to feed information about free government testing to Representative Katie Porter, Democrat of California. Ms. Porter used it to confront the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in a moment that went viral on Twitter.

Ms. Shalala, who at 79 is the oldest freshman in Congress, lacks a medical degree but has deep experience in managing epidemics. She is on a first-name basis with the nation’s senior health officials, including Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the government’s top infectious disease expert, from their work together fighting AIDS.

Ms. Shalala has been warning about the nation’s lack of pandemic preparedness for years, and says Congress bears some responsibility for the nation’s flat-footed response.

“Every time I said ‘public health infrastructure’ to Congress, their eyes glazed over,” she said. “So I blame both parties for not paying attention.”

Dr. Roe, the chairman of the G.O.P. Doctors Caucus, agreed that this is no time for politics: “I spent a career and a lifetime taking care of patients,” he said. “This ought to be all hands on deck. This is ‘Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid,’ where we both hold hands and jump off together.”

Emily Cochrane contributed reporting.

<|endoftext|>

The U.S.N.S. Mercy, a Navy hospital ship, arrived at the Port of Los Angeles on Friday to bolster a health care system that officials worry could be overwhelmed by a surge in coronavirus patients.

One train operator and engineer who worked at the port grew suspicious, he later told the authorities, according to an affidavit by an F.B.I. special agent, Douglas Swain.

The engineer, Eduardo Moreno, told investigators that he wondered if the ship had some unstated purpose, or something to do with a government takeover, one of several baseless conspiracy theories emerging about the government’s handling of the outbreak.

Those unfounded suspicions bubbled over on Tuesday when Mr. Moreno, at the end of his shift, sent a train off its tracks at full speed and crashed it some 250 yards away from the Mercy, according to prosecutors and Mr. Moreno’s statements recorded in the affidavit.

No one was injured in the crash and the Mercy was not damaged. Mr. Moreno, 44, was charged with one count of train wrecking, according to a statement released Wednesday by the U.S. Attorney’s Office in Los Angeles. The crime carries a maximum penalty of 20 years in prison.

Mr. Moreno was in custody on Wednesday, prosecutors said. His lawyer, Lisa LaBarre, could not immediately be reached for comment.

Mr. Moreno said he acted alone, according to prosecutors.

He told detectives with the Los Angeles Port Police that he had not planned to crash the train, according to remarks from their interview included in the affidavit. But while he was “pushing” the last train car of the day, his thoughts “just kept going and going,” he told the detectives according to remarks included in the affidavit.

“Sometimes you just get a little snap,” he said, according to the affidavit. “I just had it and I was committed. I just went for it, I had one chance.”

A spokesman for the port, Phillip Sanfield, said the ship was separated from the tracks by a grassy area, a parking lot and a channel of water.

“There was no way either on the tracks or off the tracks to get to the vessel,” Mr. Sanfield said.

Mr. Moreno worked for a private rail company, Pacific Harbor Line, said Stefan Friedman, a spokesman for the company. He said Mr. Moreno had been “decertified” and could no longer work as an engineer.

Prosecutors said the locomotive crashed through at least three barriers and stopped near three occupied vehicles. They said the authorities had to clean up a “substantial amount of fuel” that leaked from the train.

Video footage from the locomotive showed a man riding in the cab before the crash holding a lighted flare, prosecutors said.

An officer with the California Highway Patrol witnessed the crash and saw Mr. Moreno, wearing a bright yellow safety vest, climbing out of the locomotive’s cab after the crash, according to the affidavit.

In interviews with the authorities included in the affidavit, Mr. Moreno admitted to crashing the train, saying he knew it would draw the attention of the news media. He said he was suspicious of the Navy ship and “wanted to bring attention to the government’s activities,” according to the affidavit.

The Mercy is handling patients who have ailments unrelated to the coronavirus to “allow local hospitals in Los Angeles to concentrate on Covid-19 care,” the Department of Defense said Friday. The ship provides a “full spectrum of medical care, including general surgeries, critical care and ward care for adults,” according to the department.

Another hospital ship, the U.S.N.S. Comfort, arrived in New York Harbor on Monday with a similar mission.

<|endoftext|>

HOLLYWOOD, Fla. — Right around the time the World Health Organization was declaring the novel coronavirus a full-blown pandemic, Cody Lee Pfister walked into a Walmart in Missouri and delivered his own public service announcement — of the twisted variety.

Mr. Pfister, 26, looked directly into a camera and asked, “Who’s scared of coronavirus?” As if to answer his own question, he proceeded to lick a row of deodorants on a store shelf. For six seconds, he awkwardly slid backward, his tongue running from one brand of deodorant to the next.

He appeared amused. And satisfied enough to post the video online. Horror ensued. Grossed-out viewers from as close as his small hometown, Warrenton, Mo., to Ireland and the Netherlands reported the video prank to the police. And soon Mr. Pfister was facing charges of making a terrorist threat.

“Immature. Tasteless. Youthful indiscretion. Yes, it was a very foolish thing to do,” acknowledged Mr. Pfister’s lawyer, Patrick J. Coyne. “But he is not a bad person. He made a bad choice.”

Mr. Pfister joins a growing parade of mischief-makers, rapscallions and rogues who have been accused of carrying out all manner of pranks and tomfoolery as fear, panic and a virulent virus tear through the country. It’s March Madness meets April Fool’s Day.

From licking objects to coughing on people to willfully violating the six-feet rule, coronavirus agitators have publicly acted out. Some of their antics were mindless and silly, others costly and downright dangerous.

The woman accused of marching into a Pennsylvania grocery store and intentionally coughing and spitting her way through the produce section? Arrested and facing four felonies.

The California influencer who posted a video of himself licking his toilet? Sick in bed with the coronavirus, he later claimed, though a hoax was suspected and his Twitter account was suspended.

The unnamed person who attended a “coronavirus party” of young adults in their 20s in Kentucky? Tested positive for Covid-19. “This is one that makes me mad,” Gov. Andy Beshear said at a news conference last week. “We should forgive that person but no more of these, anywhere, statewide, ever, for any reason.”

And who can forget the seven words of one Brady Sluder, beamed from a packed Florida beach at the peak of spring break as local authorities begged students to practice social distancing: “If I get corona, I get corona.”

He has since publicly apologized.

Of course, the coronavirus crisis is not the first time there has been a collision between public health, policy and pranks.

Just last summer, America collectively gagged during the viral internet ice cream challenge as attention chasers gleefully licked ice cream and placed the cartons back on supermarket shelves — videotaped, of course, for the masses. Before long, markets were emptying whole freezers of ice cream and police officers were making arrests. One Texas man’s penchant for online fame and vanilla ice cream cost him 30 days in jail and a $2,000 fine.

For Mr. Pfister, the deodorant-licking prank turned into a serious police investigation. He was charged by the prosecuting attorney’s office in Warren County with making a terrorist threat in the second degree, a felony. His lawyer, Mr. Coyne, said the date of the prank makes all the difference. The police’s probable cause statement said the incident happened on March 11. Mr. Coyne said it happened the day before.

“Public conduct that was immature on March 10 looks completely differently through the lens of today. On March 10, when the video was taken, Covid-19 was not declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization,” he said in a statement. “Everything has changed at warp speed, but that should not work retroactively and convert a tasteless and impulsive act into a criminal terrorist threat.”

Mr. Pfister is not the only one facing charges as law enforcement officials are scrambling to arrest scofflaws and, in some cases, charge those who intentionally spread the virus.

Police said George Falcone, 50, coughed on a food store employee in Manalapan, N.J., and told the woman he had the coronavirus. He was charged with multiple offenses including making a terroristic threat.

Last Wednesday afternoon, Margaret Cirko, 35, walked into a Gerrity’s Supermarket in Hanover Township, Pa., and started coughing on cases of fresh produce, baked goods and meat, the authorities said. Over and over, she was said to declare, “I have coronavirus, you are all going to get sick,” before attempting to shoplift a 12-pack of Coors Light.

The food all had to be tossed. The loss: about $35,000.

A “twisted prank” was what the store co-owner Joe Fasula called Ms. Cirko’s actions. Police called it a felony. Charges include two felony counts of terrorist threats and one count of threats to use a “biological agent.”

“It’s really disheartening to think that someone would do this to cause havoc or to be funny or spiteful at a time like this when food is so important for the community and for comfort,” said Mr. Fasula, 44, who runs the nine-store chain with his mother, Joyce Fasula. “This makes me sick to my stomach.”

<|endoftext|>

The arts-and-crafts chain Hobby Lobby was accused of defying stay-at-home orders in at least four states during the coronavirus outbreak, prompting officials to take action against the retailer.

The moves by state and local authorities in Colorado, Indiana, Ohio and Wisconsin to shut the stores down came as governors across much of the United States have signed stay-at-home orders and health authorities have urged Americans to practice social distancing. Still, some haven’t heeded the advice, from spring breakers to some megachurches. In Florida, a pastor was arrested after defying virus orders.

W. Eric Kuhn, the senior assistant state attorney general of Colorado, where there are 10 stores, sent a cease-and-desist letter to the company after it had reopened its stores in the state this week. The letter said the company’s actions violated a March 25 executive order signed by Gov. Jared Polis directing Coloradans to stay at home and requiring all businesses to close that were not designated by state health officials as critical.

Lawrence Pacheco, a spokesman for the State Attorney General’s Office, said on Friday that the company notified the office it would comply and closed all of its stores on Thursday.

Ohio’s attorney general, Dave Yost, wrote on Twitter on Wednesday that he had sent a similar cease-and-desist letter to Hobby Lobby and that the company had agreed to close stores in his state, where there are 10.

“Same rules for everybody. It’s hard. It hurts. But it’s about saving lives,” Mr. Yost tweeted on Thursday.

The authorities in Wisconsin, where there are also 10 stores and a stay-at-home order is in place until April 24, encountered similar issues with Hobby Lobby stores. Officials in West Allis, a city west of Milwaukee, shut down a store on Monday, according to the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel. Store locations in other cities around the state were also forced to close on Tuesday after reopening on Monday.

In Jeffersonville, Ind., the Clark County Health Department closed a Hobby Lobby store that had reopened on Monday. The store had initially closed on March 24, according to WLKY, but some employees were asked to return to work when the store reopened. Last week, Gov. Eric J. Holcomb of Indiana had issued a statewide stay-at-home order, which outlined grocery stores, pharmacies, gas stations as some of the essential businesses allowed to remain open.

While several Hobby Lobby stores in Indiana did appear to be closed on Thursday, employees answering phones at three locations said the stores remained opened; they referred questions about operating during the outbreak to their corporate office.

Hobby Lobby, which has more than 900 stores across 46 states and is based in Oklahoma City, did not immediately respond to requests for comment.

Last month, the company announced in a statement about Covid-19 that it was closely monitoring developments to ensure it was following recommendations from health authorities. The company also announced new efforts to safeguard the health and safety of its customers and employees.

In Colorado, Mr. Kuhn wrote that Hobby Lobby had until 5 p.m. on Thursday to comply with the closing order or the state would seek court relief, including a temporary restraining order.

Mr. Kuhn’s letter was sent to David Green, the founder and chief executive of Hobby Lobby, which is widely known for its Supreme Court challenge of an Affordable Care Act provision requiring family-owned corporations to pay for insurance coverage of contraception.

In a 2014 ruling in favor of Hobby Lobby and a second company, both of which were owned by Christian families, the Supreme Court said the provision had violated a federal law protecting religious freedom.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — The C.I.A. has been warning the White House since at least early February that China has vastly understated its coronavirus infections and that its count could not be relied upon as the United States compiles predictive models to fight the virus, according to current and former intelligence officials.

The intelligence briefings in recent weeks, based at least in part on information from C.I.A. assets in China, played an important role in President Trump’s negotiation on Thursday of an apparent détente with President Xi Jinping of China. Since then, both countries have ratcheted back criticism of each other.

Obtaining a more accurate count of the Chinese rate of infection and deaths from the virus has worldwide public health implications at a time of grave uncertainty over the virus, its speed of transmission and other fundamental questions. For American officials, the totals are critical to getting a better understanding of how Covid-19 will affect the United States in the months to come and of the effectiveness of countermeasures like social distancing, according to American intelligence agencies and White House officials.

So far, to the frustration of both the White House and the intelligence community, the agencies have been unable to glean more accurate numbers through their collection efforts.

But American intelligence agencies have concluded that the Chinese government itself does not know the extent of the virus and is as blind as the rest of the world. Midlevel bureaucrats in the city of Wuhan, where the virus originated, and elsewhere in China have been lying about infection rates, testing and death counts, fearful that if they report numbers that are too high they will be punished, lose their position or worse, current and former intelligence officials said.

Bureaucratic misreporting is a chronic problem for any government, but it has grown worse in China as the Communist leadership has taken a more authoritarian turn in recent years under Mr. Xi.

No complete picture of the virus exists anywhere because of factors beyond government suppression, including testing shortages, varying measurement standards and asymptomatic infections that could account for up to one in four coronavirus cases. Iran has obfuscated its struggles with the pandemic. Italy’s death count of more than 13,000, the most worldwide, leaves out people who died outside hospitals. Testing in the United States lags behind other countries.

But since January, White House officials have come to view with skepticism the Chinese tallies in particular and asked the C.I.A. and other intelligence agencies to prioritize collection of information on China.

Bloomberg News first reported the C.I.A.’s assessment that China was underreporting its virus diagnoses and deaths. Officials played down a revelation about an intelligence report sent last week to the White House, saying that the C.I.A. has for several weeks told White House officials not to trust the numbers that Beijing was handing to the World Health Organization.

The American intelligence about understated numbers predates recent reporting in the Chinese news media that the death count in Wuhan could be 5,000 or more, double the official number. Intelligence officers have not verified the press reports and have left them out of their reports, according to people briefed on their work.

American officials cautioned that even with their own sourcing, many of the intelligence agencies’ warnings to the White House since the beginning of the outbreak have hewed relatively close to reports from journalists, who have been aggressively reporting on the coronavirus outbreak in China and the Chinese government’s efforts to suppress reporting about its spread.

China has credited its drastic containment measures — including a lockdown of nearly 60 million people — for a drop in newly reported cases in recent weeks, but many people outside its government have raised concerns that the figures are incomplete.

For example, China has not been reporting the number of asymptomatic cases it is aware of. As many as 25 percent of people who contract the virus may not show signs of it, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have said.

Asked about China’s numbers at a news conference on Wednesday, Robert C. O’Brien, the national security adviser, said the United States was “not in a position” to confirm them. Without acknowledging any classified intelligence reports, he noted that public reporting had called the numbers into question.

“There’s no way to confirm any of those numbers,” Mr. O’Brien said. “There’s lots of public reporting on whether the numbers are too low.”

Officials also said that China’s underreporting of its pandemic totals was unsurprising, saying that official statistics from the country are often lies.

Tensions between Washington and Beijing had been high after the virus spread beyond Wuhan and reached the United States, forcing shutdowns of wide swaths of the economy to control the spread.

Chinese diplomats have spread disinformation, including false reports that the virus originated from a United States Army lab and other conspiracy theories. Mr. Trump has retaliated by referring to Covid-19 as “the Chinese virus,” and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo derailed an international communiqué in an effort to label the disease as coming from China.

But after the call between Mr. Xi and Mr. Trump last week, an uneasy peace took hold. While the Chinese media has continued to spread conspiracy theories, the most prominent Chinese diplomats have tempered their comments.

Mr. Trump, too, has toned down his harsh language. Asked about intelligence reports that China had misreported the virus’s damage, Mr. Trump suggested he may have discussed the matter with Mr. Xi.

“The numbers seem to be a little bit on the light side, and I’m being nice when I say that, relative to what we witnessed and what was reported, but we discussed that with him,” Mr. Trump said. “Not so much the numbers as what they did and how they’re doing.”

But then Mr. Trump mentioned his trade deal and Chinese spending on American agriculture and tempered his criticism.

“As to whether or not their numbers are accurate,” he said, “I’m not an accountant from China.”

Mark Mazzetti contributed reporting.

<|endoftext|>

HOUSTON — A coronavirus outbreak at a San Antonio nursing home has infected 67 of the facility’s 84 residents, killing one, the largest spread of the virus at a Texas long-term care facility, city and county officials said on Friday.

The outbreak at the Southeast Nursing and Rehabilitation Center was described by local officials as “contained,” but they were scrambling on Friday to perform additional tests and to track down all of the facility’s 60 employees. Eight of the staff members have tested positive for the virus, and tracking its spread has been complicated by the fact that numerous employees also worked at other nursing homes in the San Antonio region.

“This morning we launched an aggressive, multilayered response to try to get our arms around the extent of this local outbreak,” Charles Hood, the San Antonio fire chief, told reporters at a news conference.

City officials on Friday amended previously issued emergency orders to prohibit nursing home employees from working in multiple facilities. Two of the eight infected employees worked in other facilities, and employees who have not been tested worked in at least seven nursing homes in the area. Such crossover of workers at multiple sites was one of the factors that contributed to a deadly coronavirus outbreak in nursing homes in the Seattle area, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said in a recent report.

In San Antonio, medical-response teams were visiting the seven facilities where Southeast employees may have worked to test all residents and workers who show symptoms. Officials were also planning to visit and evaluate 34 nursing homes that have received the lowest federal ratings.

“In case anyone in San Antonio needed a wake-up call about the seriousness of Covid-19 to our community, this is it,” Mayor Ron Nirenberg said on Friday.

For weeks, Texas had been the largest state whose governor had not ordered all residents to stay indoors except for certain essential activities. But at a news conference on Tuesday, Mr. Abbott announced he had issued an executive order instructing Texans to “minimize social gatherings and minimize in-person contact with people who are not in the same household.” except when they were providing or obtaining essential services.

Those essential activities included health care, law enforcement, food and agriculture, energy, financial services, and holding in-person gatherings at houses of worship, as long as social-distancing guidelines were followed.

At first, the governor shied away from calling his new order a statewide stay-at-home mandate. “A stay-at-home strategy would mean that you have to stay at home, you cannot leave home under any circumstances,” Mr. Abbott told reporters. “That obviously is not what we’ve articulated here.”

The next day, however, Mr. Abbott released a video message, clarifying, “I issued this executive order that requires all Texans to stay at home, except to provide essential services or do essential things.” And on Friday, asked if Texas was indeed under a statewide stay-at-home order, Mr. Abbott’s spokesman, John Wittman, said that it was.

Of the San Antonio nursing home’s 84 residents, 11 have had their tests come back negative; those residents were being kept in a separate part of the building, and employees treating them were not providing services to those who are infected. Six residents’ tests were still pending or were inconclusive, officials said.

The eight employees who tested positive are in self-isolation away from the nursing home. Officials were attempting to test the other 52 employees — seven were tested on Thursday, 17 were scheduled to be tested on Friday and medical personnel were trying to contact the others.

The nursing home, which is licensed for 116 beds and is owned by Southeast SNF LLC, according to state records, is listed on the federal government’s Medicare website as “much below average,” receiving one out of five stars.

The facility was fined $62,016 by federal regulators last March. The fine by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services came after the staff failed to consult the doctor of a woman who did not have a bowel movement for 13 days. She was later hospitalized, according to federal inspection data.

<|endoftext|>

Good morning.

(Here’s the sign-up, if you don’t already get California Today delivered to your inbox.)

Believe it or not, it’s April.

In California, we’ve been staying home for weeks now, and although experts have said — cautiously — that distancing efforts appear to be making a difference, measuring that progress is complex.

Each day, state, local and federal officials and agencies unleash floods of new data that seem to clarify some parts of the picture while complicating others.

Dr. Bob Wachter, a professor and chair of the University of California, San Francisco’s department of medicine, has been posting updates on Twitter explaining what he’s seeing day by day.

On Tuesday, as public health officials in the Bay Area expanded shelter-in-place orders, I asked him to take a step back and help demystify some of the bigger trends for us.

Here’s our conversation, lightly edited and condensed:

How are you doing? Things must be hectic.

I’m mostly working out of my house. It’s got a kind of odd “Wizard of Oz” feel — trying to understand what’s going on and making a whole bunch of decisions.

And we have this layer of having prepared for the apocalypse, but we haven’t seen it here, which we’re of course grateful for.

You’ve mentioned that may be a signal that the early orders to stay home in California are helping keep hospitals from being hit as hard here. Meanwhile, testing is less available. So are confirmed case numbers still useful?

Yes, they are useful, but you have to adjust them for two factors.

One is the prevalence of testing in a community. But even though there’s more testing, the increase in New York compared to California is so many orders of magnitude higher that it doesn’t account for the difference.

The second is overall population.

If you adjust for those things, what I’m looking at is the overall increase — particularly the day-over-day increase.

The number of new cases diagnosed today in San Francisco is about two-thirds of what it was four or five days ago, which means the slope of the increase is lower than it was, which, to me, is reasonably good evidence of some flattening of the curve.

If this thing was expanding in the way epidemics do when they’re not being mitigated or addressed, the growth is exponential.

What about hospitalizations? What are you looking at there?

My hospital made that number public early on and I think that was an incredibly smart decision, because data are better than what replaces data, which is rumors and speculation.

I don’t pay that much attention to the number of patients under investigation — people who come in with Covid-19 symptoms. Most will turn out not to have Covid-19. A lot who come in will have pneumonia. On average, one out of 20 will be positive.

The number of confirmed cases we have at any given time has gone up slightly from between eight and 10 last week, to now 13 to 15. But if we’re seeing 14 confirmed cases and a comparable hospital in New York has 150 to 200 cases, there’s something going on.

A number that has shifted for us in the last several days is that about a week ago, if there were 10 Covid-19 patients at U.C.S.F., eight might have been on the main floor of the hospital while two were in intensive care. That ratio has flipped. Today, we have 14 total and nine in the I.C.U.

I suspect that has a couple of factors associated with that. Once people are sick enough to be on a mechanical ventilator, many will die. Those who live will spend several weeks on a ventilator. Floor patients can come in and leave more quickly.

The second factor is that these patients can get very sick very quickly, so if your I.C.U. is packed, your threshold for sending someone there is very high, and we’re not getting crushed in the same way.

Today, for example, of our nine people in the I.C.U. five are intubated and on mechanical ventilation and four are not, so our I.C.U. number might not be totally comparable with a hospital experiencing a surge — they’d still be watching those patients on the floor.

Can you talk to me about how you’re looking at hospital capacity in relation to cases? The state is scrambling to add and staff up a lot of hospital space, but what are you keeping an eye on to try to gauge if it will be enough?

It’s complicated and it’s fluid.

A hospital like ours, a month ago, was packed every day. In the main adult hospital we have about 550 beds and if you asked, we would’ve said we have zero capacity for new patients.

But once it became clear that the coronavirus could come to the U.S. and be pretty dire, we dialed down using all the levers we had. That meant the cancellation of any surgery that wasn’t an absolute emergency.

The model I’ve been looking at is the University of Washington’s and it looks like California is on track to do OK.

What about testing? That’s been a concern. Is there a number of tests being administered per day that would be adequate?

The way I think about it is this: There are two reasons one tests. One is for your own clinical needs, meaning people are coming to your emergency room, calling into clinics, who might have symptoms or health care workers who might have symptoms. Now we’re even beginning to test asymptomatic patients who are going into transplant surgery or others.

We’re now able to do 300 to 400 tests a day, and that’s enough to meet those clinical needs.

That’s entirely separate from testing for epidemiological or surveillance purposes. As everybody’s curves start getting better, how do you decide when to open the world back up? You really need to know the prevalence of illness in the community.

If someone has mild symptoms, there’s nothing we would do about it. There’s no treatment — we’d just tell them to go home. That’s the right call clinically, but from an epidemiological stance we need to know where there are still embers active in the community.

It really does influence our overall infection-control strategy.

Let’s talk about the latter, epidemiological testing. I know there’s no magic number, but is there any level of testing that might make it safe to start thinking about lifting some restrictions?

There’s a report led by Dr. Scott Gottlieb from the American Enterprise Institute that says we need a national capacity to do 750,000 tests a week. I don’t know what that would translate to in the Bay Area.

Everything we do here is a risk-benefit equation — of keeping everybody inside and shutting down the economy, and loosening restrictions.

It’s not a problem we’re confronting now. But sometime in May, that will probably be the dominant issue.

Ironically, in places where the virus is surging, it gets terrible abruptly and then it gets better quickly. In places where you’re flattening the curve, it may take longer until you’re down pretty low.

[Read the latest updates on the pandemic from around the world here.]

California Today goes live at 6:30 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com. Were you forwarded this email? Sign up for California Today here and read every edition online here.

Jill Cowan grew up in Orange County, graduated from U.C. Berkeley and has reported all over the state, including the Bay Area, Bakersfield and Los Angeles — but she always wants to see more. Follow along here or on Twitter, @jillcowan.

California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and graduated from U.C. Berkeley.

<|endoftext|>

ATLANTA — Gov. Brian Kemp of Georgia signed a shelter-in-place order on Thursday, shutting down restaurant dining rooms, barbershops, bars and gyms across the state. He called it an effort to buy critical time as Georgia braced for a surge in cases of the coronavirus.

Yet as soon as the order went into effect the next evening, the sandy beaches on Tybee Island, which had been closed for two weeks, were once again open to the public.

The executive order signed by Mr. Kemp, who had been among the governors resisting more-stringent measures, has stirred a backlash from some local officials as it superseded their efforts to curb the virus’s spread, particularly in coastal communities that had moved to close beaches on their own.

“No one wants to walk on the beach more than I,” Shirley Sessions, the mayor of Tybee Island, a community of about 3,000 people just below the South Carolina state line, said in a letter to Mr. Kemp. “However, I firmly believe it is a small sacrifice to pay in the long run to help conquer this Covid-19 enemy.”

State officials said that the rules maintain social distancing and discourage beachgoers from spreading out on the sand. Congregating is forbidden. Tents and chairs are not allowed. State law enforcement officials will also ramp up patrols on the beaches, in parking lots and on the highways leading to the coast.

“People who voluntarily leave their shelters to go to our beaches can only do so for the purpose of outdoor exercise,” Josh Hildebrandt, a spokesman for the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, said in a statement.

The dispute in Georgia reflects the tensions that have flared between state and local officials across the country in responding to the pandemic. In South Carolina, some of its largest cities implemented stay-at-home ordinances after Gov. Henry McMaster delayed in ordering those measures, prompting the State Attorney General’s Office to weigh in. It issued an opinion that said such authority belonged to the governor and not municipal officials.

In Florida, some believed that a statewide order issued by Gov. Ron DeSantis might override tougher ordinances enacted by cities, but he made it clear that it outlined minimum guidelines.

Mr. Kemp, a Republican, faced increasing criticism over the past week as he avoided implementing stricter orders that many states had already employed.

He also was among the governors who cited fears of wrecking local economies and argued that they believed in maintaining personal responsibility, rather than issuing a mandate. Most of the governors contended that although they did not implement stay-at-home orders, they acted aggressively in other ways. But over the last few days, some of those governors relented.

In Alabama, Gov. Kay Ivey signed an executive order that went into effect on Saturday evening. “Late yesterday afternoon, it became obvious that more has to be done,” she said in a news conference on Friday, adding, “Bottom line: Folks just aren’t paying attention.”

The shelter-in-place order in Georgia went into effect on Friday at 6 p.m. and expires on April 13. Mr. Kemp argued that the action was necessary as the state prepared for a sharp rise in cases expected in the coming days.

“To win this war, we have to hunker down and continue to chop a lot of wood,” Mr. Kemp said at a news conference on Thursday, adding, “It is best you stay home. For the most part, Georgians are heeding this advice and I couldn’t be more grateful for that.”

But officials in some of the local beach communities argued that the order stood to hurt their efforts.

“We had carefully considered ways to keep people safe here and the governor’s order has undermined everything we were doing,” Peter Murphy, a commissioner in Glynn County who represents St. Simons Island, a coastal resort area, told The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. St. Simons Island beaches had closed on March 21.

On Tybee Island, which closed its beaches on March 20, officials expressed fears of endangering the health of residents and taxing the local police force. Indeed, Ms. Sessions, the mayor, said that all six of its officers are quarantined. Officials said the city is not opening parking lots and lifeguards will not be on duty.

Game wardens reported that the beaches across the state remained largely quiet and there were no problems with maintaining social distancing. On Saturday, the conditions on Tybee Island were ideal for a day at the beach: sunny and about 70 degrees. But beach cameras showed a spread of empty sand with the occasional person strolling past or splashing in the water.

<|endoftext|>

Jason Hargrove was furious.

A woman on his bus had just coughed four or five times, unguarded. He went on Facebook and vented his anger, cursing at times. In a video posted on March 21, he railed against the disrespect that he said passengers like her had shown workers like him who were trying to make Detroit run in the midst of a pandemic.

“We’re out here as public workers, doing our job, trying to make an honest living to take care of our families,” he said. “But for you to get on the bus, and stand on the bus, and cough several times without covering up your mouth, and you know that we’re in the middle of a pandemic, that lets me know that some folks don’t care.”

On Wednesday, a week and a half after recording the video outside his bus, Mr. Hargrove, a 50-year-old, married father of six, died from complications of Covid-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus, according to his union and city officials.

Mr. Hargrove’s video has since been viewed more than half a million times, and has resonated as a reminder of the dangers that transit employees and other blue-collar workers face as they suddenly find themselves on the front lines of the coronavirus.

“He knew his life was being put in jeopardy — even though he was going to work for the citizens of Detroit every day — by somebody who just didn’t care, somebody who didn’t take this seriously,” Mayor Mike Duggan told reporters on Thursday. “And now he’s gone.”

Mayor Duggan said he thought of Mr. Hargrove and other workers who put themselves at risk whenever he saw people violating social distancing rules.

“You’re putting really good people like Jason Hargrove’s lives on the line,” he said. “I hope the people in this city and in this country will watch his video and listen to his words, because it’s a message this country needs to hear.”

Detroit, which has endured population loss and the largest municipal bankruptcy in the nation, has become a coronavirus hot spot, with more than 3,900 cases and nearly 130 deaths as of Saturday afternoon, according to the City Health Department.

City officials said they were not sure when Mr. Hargrove contracted the virus.

But even before his death, Detroit’s bus drivers had complained that the city was not doing enough to protect them, said Glenn Tolbert, the president of the local transit workers’ union, who himself tested positive for the coronavirus on Thursday. Mr. Tolbert said on Saturday that 200 of the union’s 525 members were in quarantine.

“The fear is real, and this virus is real, and the closer it hits to home, it just makes it more real,” Mr. Tolbert said.

On March 17, Detroit’s bus drivers refused to go to work until the city acted.

The same day, Mayor Duggan announced several changes to protect the drivers, including waiving fares; requiring passengers to use only the rear doors; and making sure drivers had gloves, masks and disinfecting wipes. The city also stepped up the cleaning and sanitizing of buses, according to John Roach, a city spokesman.

Detroit has also reached an agreement with the Greektown Casino-Hotel to provide rooms for bus drivers who are worried about infecting family members at home, Mr. Roach said.

In his video, Mr. Hargrove said the woman who coughed on his bus without covering her mouth showed that some people were not taking the virus seriously.

“It’s folks dying out here,” he said, adding that he felt violated both for himself and for other passengers who were on the bus.

Mr. Hargrove had been a bus driver since October 2016 and was an active member of the union, Mr. Tolbert said. On his Facebook page, Mr. Hargrove had posted a photo of himself wearing a mask on his bus with the captions “#ICannotStayHome” and “I’mOnTheRoad4U.”

“He was frustrated, but he was a professional guy to the end,” Mr. Tolbert said.

“I just don’t want his death to be in vain,” he added. “I want us to get through this thing, and I want the transit operators around the world to be recognized as first responders and given the necessary equipment.”

<|endoftext|>

[Read our Coronavirus Relief Small Business F.A.Q.]

WASHINGTON — The Small Business Administration doled out tens of millions of dollars in contracts in recent days — including $50 million for a contract linked to the firm of a friend and donor to President Trump — to help it deal with the deluge of loan applications from businesses ravaged by the coronavirus-triggered economic collapse.

The flurry of contracts came as the S.B.A. was straining to quickly disseminate hundreds of billions of dollars through banks to millions of small businesses. It is a logistical and technical challenge that people who have worked with the traditionally low-profile agency say is unlike any it has faced previously, and one that the agency acknowledges requires private sector expertise to execute.

The Trump administration is leaning heavily on the private sector to help it carry out elements of the $2 trillion coronavirus relief package signed by President Trump last month.

On Thursday, the Treasury Department, which is overseeing $500 billion in assistance, announced that it had tapped a trio of Wall Street firms — PJT Partners, Moelis & Company and Perella Weinberg Partners — to advise the government in its bailout of the airlines, cargo carriers and companies deemed critical to national security.

The New York Federal Reserve retained the investment firm BlackRock to run bond-purchasing programs connected to federal efforts to revive the economy, and Mr. Trump listed the firm’s chief executive, Laurence D. Fink, as among the Wall Street executives consulted about disseminating stimulus funds to corporations.

The contracts and consultations have raised questions about favoritism, especially for the financial industry, which critics hold responsible for the last big economic crisis in 2008.

Along with the Treasury Department, the Small Business Administration has been given the job of holding off the worst of the economic damage in this crisis. The S.B.A. has been tasked with spearheading the small business side of coronavirus recovery.

In addition to administering a $349 billion loan program created by the stimulus package, which began accepting a flood of applications on Friday, the agency had already been struggling with a surge in coronavirus-related loan applications through other programs, including its disaster loan program. The stimulus bill included $562 million for disaster loans “to prevent, prepare for, and respond to coronavirus.”

But last week, the website for business owners to apply for disaster loans related to the coronavirus reportedly was shut down because of security issues.

Jennifer Kelly, a spokeswoman for the S.B.A. said in a statement that “this unprecedented global pandemic requires an unprecedented public-private response, and every hurdle that impedes, slows, or otherwise frustrates that response is being cleared in consultation with legal and ethics officials.”

The agency has turned to a range of companies to buttress its ability to process the disaster loans as well as the new $349 billion loan program for small businesses that opened on Friday.

On Sunday, the agency’s Office of Disaster Assistance issued an emergency $50 million contract to support its processing of coronavirus disaster loans to a Virginia-based government contractor called RER Solutions. It is partnering on its S.B.A. work with Rocket Loans, a Detroit-based company that provides consumer loans online.

Rocket Loans is part of a family of companies founded by the billionaire Dan Gilbert, who also co-founded Quicken Loans, which donated $750,000 to Mr. Trump’s inauguration and $67,000 to the committee that hosted the 2016 Republican convention. Mr. Gilbert has visited the White House, where Mr. Trump singled him out as “a great friend of mine, a supporter and great guy.”

Quicken Loans last year paid $32.5 million to settle a years-old lawsuit in which it was accused by the Justice Department of making hundreds of improper loans through the Federal Housing Administration’s lending program, costing the agency millions of dollars.

The S.B.A. contract with RER Solutions, which is for “data analysis and loan recommendation services for Covid-19,” appears to be related to a $10-million-per-year contract that RER signed with the S.B.A. in late 2018 for similar services related to processing disaster loan applications. Rocket Loans was a subcontractor on that work.

“We are stepping up to help solve problems under an existing contract,” said Aaron Emerson, a spokesman for Rocket Loans, adding “we were tapped to help the S.B.A. process applications.”

Mr. Emerson and Errin Green, the chairwoman and chief executive of RER Solutions, said their firms had nothing to do with the disaster-loan website that reportedly experienced problems last week.

Neither RER, nor Rocket Loans, would say how much of the money from the work would go to Rocket Loans.

Representatives from Rocket Loans have reached out in recent days to outside law firms and others for help in expanding the company’s operations to handle the government work, according to a person with direct knowledge of the effort.

Frank Taylor, whose company, The First Choice, bid against RER Solutions for the S.B.A. contract in 2018 and unsuccessfully challenged the decision to award it to RER, said that the systems created by RER and Rocket Loans “were not set up to take the volume of S.B.A. loans” likely to flood the system from businesses and people affected by coronavirus.

“And now it’s biting them in the butt,” he said.

Mr. Taylor asserted Rocket Loans did not have a track record in government contracting sufficient to warrant trusting it with the S.B.A. contract, and suggested that Mr. Gilbert’s political connections may have played a role in his company landing the work.

“I’ve learned in this business that politics plays a role in every aspect of the federal government, so it would not surprise me,” said Mr. Taylor, who described himself as a Democrat.

Mr. Emerson, the Rocket Loans spokesman, pointed out that Mr. Gilbert’s companies had donated to Democratic committees, as well, though those donations pale in comparison to donations by Mr. Gilbert and Quicken to Republicans.

“Our support of both Republican and Democratic parties is wholly irrelevant,” Mr. Emerson said. “We build great products and deliver unmatched service.”

S.B.A. has issued contracts to other firms to provide other services related to processing applications from businesses hit by coronavirus.

Late last month, its Office of Disaster Assistance hired a company called Liveops to help with customer service related to its coronavirus response. Last week, the office signed a $5.3 million deal for Salesforce software licenses “to support Covid-19.” The next day, it had hired a firm called Agility Technologies for more than $2 million dollars to work on a replacement for its Disaster Loan Application Portal, according to contracting records.

The private sector influence goes beyond the disaster loans system, as the agency becomes the hub for an additional $349 billion in loans to small businesses that are trying to make payroll.

On Sunday, the agency inked a $95,000 deal for “social media support services” related to the virus from a Washington, D.C., public relations firm. The next day, it signed a contract worth more than $9 million dollars for an “emergency CAFS hardware refresh,” a likely reference to its Capital Access Financial System.

Other companies are likely to be involved in the agency’s response to the crisis. A spokesman for Microsoft said in a statement that it was “actively discussing how we can extend our support further with additional agencies including the S.B.A.”

Jo Becker contributed reporting from Los Angeles.

<|endoftext|>

Good morning.

(Here’s the sign-up, if you don’t already get California Today delivered to your inbox.)

Two weeks ago, leaders in the Bay Area ordered residents to shelter in place and leave their homes only to buy food, get medicine or perform other “essential tasks,” making the region the first to venture into a life-altering experiment.

The idea, they said, was to slow the spread of Covid-19, and prevent infected patients from overwhelming hospitals and health care systems.

Days later, on March 19, Gov. Gavin Newsom expanded the directive to all of California, home to almost 40 million people.

[See which states and cities have told residents to stay home.]

It would be days more before Gov. Andrew Cuomo of New York put the state “on pause,” a different label for a very similar order.

Now, New York City is the center of the pandemic. New York State had reported 965 deaths from the virus, compared with 130 in California, as of Sunday, according to The Times’s tracking.

It’s much too soon to say why New York has been hit harder — and whether early containment measures by California officials are paying off.

Testing has been significantly less available here than in New York, and public health officials have repeated that as testing becomes more widespread in California, it’s likely to reveal many more cases.

But The Associated Press noted that California’s shortage of tests in the early weeks of the crisis doesn’t alone explain the differences between the states.

[Read more about debates over how much the public should know about the state’s coronavirus cases.]

Certainly, as my colleagues have reported, New York City’s density hasn’t helped keep people apart. (Although, as my colleagues have also reported, density will also be a source of resilience in the difficult recovery.)

And over the weekend, Mr. Newsom and other California officials got some tentative thumbs up from experts who said that California’s restrictions — provided that they continue and that residents adhere to them — may help the state’s biggest urban areas avoid the kind of devastating scenes playing out in New York City.

“When history is written,” California leaders including Mayor London Breed of San Francisco and Mr. Newsom, “should get credit for saving hundreds of lives,” Dr. Bob Wachter said on Twitter. He is a professor and chair of the University of California, San Francisco’s department of medicine.

Nevertheless, officials across the state are scrambling to meet demand for hospital beds and health care. And they’re still pleading with residents to stay home.

“Only time will tell us if that time you didn’t go out saved a life,” Mayor Eric Garcetti of Los Angeles said on Sunday as he laid out plans to add more hospital beds at the Los Angeles Convention Center. “We’re racing against time.”

[Read more about the arrival of a 1,000-bed Navy hospital ship at the Port of Los Angeles.]

We often link to sites that limit access for nonsubscribers. We appreciate your reading Times coverage, but we also encourage you to support local news if you can.

Mr. Newsom on Friday announced a statewide halt of evictions until May 31 for those affected by the outbreak in a long-sought move that activists have said would at least temporarily help newly unemployed Californians stay in their homes. But that rent will have to be paid eventually, which is troubling for those who were already living paycheck to paycheck.

Read more about bills due this week and what that means for the economy. [The New York Times]

The U.S. tried to build a new fleet of now desperately needed ventilators. Here’s how the mission failed. [The New York Times]

Also, Los Angeles got 170 broken ventilators from the federal government. So a Silicon Valley company is fixing them. [The Los Angeles Times]

A Lancaster teenager whose death has been linked to Covid-19 was turned away from urgent care because he didn’t have health insurance, the city’s mayor said. [Gizmodo]

Instacart workers, who shop for and deliver groceries, are set to go on strike today, saying they haven’t been given adequate protection from infection at supermarkets. [The New York Times]

Also, here’s what to know before you go to the grocery store. [The New York Times]

My colleague Emma Goldberg wondered about the impulse to make art to reflect troubled times. Here’s her dispatch on art in the coronavirus era:

Making art amid a pandemic can raise thorny questions. David Goodsell, a computational biologist by day and amateur painter by night, has spent years making watercolors of viruses — Ebola, Zika, H.I.V. — to show their cellular structures.

When he tweeted his image of the coronavirus, he was surprised by the outpouring of responses it provoked, some critical of his decision to glamorize something so deadly.

“You have to admit, these viruses are so symmetrical that they’re beautiful,” said Mr. Goodsell, an associate professor at Scripps Research Institute in La Jolla. “Are bright colors and pretty stuff the right approach? The jury’s still out. I’m not trying to make these things look dangerous, I want people to understand how they’re built.”

Seeing the infection count rise, Mr. Goodsell said he worried about the health of his aging parents in Los Angeles. But he hopes his painting can quell fears about the novel coronavirus by educating people on the virus’s workings: “I want people to think of viruses as being an entity that we can learn about and fight. They’re not nebulous nothings.”

Across the country, artists, sellers and buyers are wrestling with the ethics of crafting virus-themed works. Earlier this month, Etsy removed all products mentioning Covid-19, which affected hundreds of items, including “I Survived Coronavirus 2020” T-shirts and crochet models of the virus.

An Etsy spokesperson said that its ban aimed to ensure no one would “exploit the developing coronavirus situation.”

The decision rankled some artists who, like Mr. Goodsell, view their works as educational. One Etsy seller, Sydni Rubio, who had posted Covid-19 stickers for $4 a piece, wrote a petition protesting the ban; she said virus art “brings awareness to the epidemic.”

But for some creatives, Covid-19 works are more personal. In early March, Duyi Han, a designer in Los Angeles, was messaging daily with his grandparents quarantined in their Wuhan home, two miles from the seafood market where the outbreak began. He thought mournfully of the city he visited as a child, whose cherry blossom-lined streets had been deserted.

So Mr. Han created an oil painting and mural design, called “The Saints Wear White,” that depicts a chapel in Hubei province filled with coronavirus medical workers in decontamination suits.

“When I work on it, it’s kind of a spiritual experience,” Mr. Han said. “When I paint those figures I really put my faith in them.” More than 3,000 Chinese health care workers have been infected from the outbreak.

To Mr. Han, seeking beauty from crisis is a timeworn tradition, one he’s thought about since studying Pablo Picasso’s “Guernica.” He comforted his family in Wuhan by sending them photos of his art; in return, they sent pictures of food and masks to assure him they were safe.

California Today goes live at 6:30 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com. Were you forwarded this email? Sign up for California Today here and read every edition online here.

Jill Cowan grew up in Orange County, graduated from U.C. Berkeley and has reported all over the state, including the Bay Area, Bakersfield and Los Angeles — but she always wants to see more. Follow along here or on Twitter, @jillcowan.

California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and graduated from U.C. Berkeley.

<|endoftext|>

Good morning.

(Here’s the sign-up, if you don’t already get California Today by email.)

Today, Adam Popescu, a journalist based in Los Angeles, looks at how stay-at-home orders are affecting the construction industry.

The update comes as cities and states around the country grapple with similar questions. On Tuesday, Bay Area health officials shut down a broad range of construction projects, including office buildings and market-rate housing — after initially deeming them essential.

In Los Angeles, work continued. Here’s Adam’s dispatch:

Throughout Los Angeles, construction crews are clustering on work sites and at food trucks, many not distancing or wearing any protection besides an occasional hard hat.

Masks and gloves are not mandatory, according to Los Angeles’s safety regulations, but keeping at least six feet apart is a measure the authorities call central to stopping Covid-19’s spread.

With most businesses shuttered, the question of what is essential and why was on display this week at a construction site in a densely populated section of apartment buildings just south of West Hollywood.

A worker in a baseball cap pulled out a blue bandanna, tying the rag around his nose and mouth.

“They should be wearing masks and gloves. If they’re not distancing, they should be,” said Anat Mergi, the co-owner of Ariel Builders, Inc., the company running the site. “No one has told us to close anything, so we’re not. This is an essential business.”

[What counts as an essential business, according to California’s order?]

She’s right. Officials agree this work is essential, but what’s happening in neighborhoods like this — with landlords and contractors scrambling, and residents wondering about how to report concerns — reveals confusion over a broad directive with lots of room for interpretation.

Concerned residents have also been searching for clarity: Do they contact the county’s Public Health Department, the Los Angeles Police Department or the city attorney, if they see violations?

“This is uncharted territory for all of us,” said Josh Rubenstein, a spokesman for the L.A.P.D.

On Monday, the department visited 46 nonessential businesses still operating and the city closed all farmers’ markets until they could come up with plans to ensure shoppers and vendors were able to keep their distance.

The failure to follow social-distancing rules is not an arrestable offense, said Mr. Rubenstein, but it is a misdemeanor. Violating the city’s “Safer at Home” order could result in fines or even jail time.

“I will give a warning to anyone doing those improvements: six feet or we will shut you down,” Mayor Eric Garcetti said Sunday. “We have inspectors that will be going out to work sites.”

On Tuesday, the city authorized its Department of Building and Safety to visit construction sites in order to enforce social distancing and personal protective equipment. And on Wednesday, The Los Angeles Times reported that sites will be required to create a Covid-19 exposure control plan.

Groups of city staff and volunteers had previously been warning businesses that were in violation before a series of escalating measures, including shutting water and power and citations from L.A.P.D.

With measures evolving, just which stretched agency takes the lead has been unclear. Right now, residents can call 311 to report nonessential businesses refusing to cooperate or share complaints here.

[Read the latest on the coronavirus pandemic in California.]

We often link to sites that limit access for nonsubscribers. We appreciate your reading Times coverage, but we also encourage you to support local news if you can.

Here’s our new map showing coronavirus case counts in each California county. (Stay tuned to learn more about it.) [The New York Times]

State health officials advised residents to wear masks when they’re out, if they can access a mask while still sticking to distancing measures. [California Department of Public Health]

The news came after federal officials said they were weighing advising everyone to wear masks in order to slow community transmission. [The New York Times]

And here’s how to make your own fabric mask. [The New York Times]

One is a top-ranked research hospital in West L.A. and another is a community hospital in South L.A. Both are being tested during the pandemic. [The New York Times]

Federal prosecutors accused a locomotive driver of intentionally derailing a train near the Mercy, the U.S. Navy hospital ship docked at the Port of L.A. The authorities reported that the man said, “People don’t know what’s going on here. Now they will.” [The Los Angeles Times]

The University of California system won’t require applicants for 2021 admission to take the SAT or ACT. [The Sacramento Bee]

Representative Devin Nunes said that decisions to keep schools closed for the rest of the year were “overkill.” [The New York Times]

If you missed it, Gov. Gavin Newsom unveiled a new hotline for seniors looking for help finding resources. It is 833-544-2374.

Drive-throughs are open, the skies are blue and the freeways are empty. But this isn’t how it was supposed to be. [The New York Times]

A little while ago, I asked readers to send photos of their animal colleagues as offices around the state told employees to work from home.

Dr. Helen Yu, 34, a child psychiatrist, sent the above photo of Cosmo, the cat, and Mina, the dog.

“They are tolerating being close to each other in order to be next to the furnace,” she wrote.

Later, I caught up with Dr. Yu by phone to ask her how things were going with her patients. I was curious about what it was like working with kids who may have already been struggling. And now, their school had been canceled and their parents might be out of jobs.

When the technology is working, Dr. Yu told me, the video appointments are mostly fine substitutes for face-to-face interactions — in fact, she said, the change gave her a rare opportunity to see where her patients live, “which can be helpful.”

Still, she said, “this is a huge disruption to their lives.” Some patients were having trouble sleeping. Some had symptoms under control that were coming back.

I asked what advice she’s been giving patients and their families.

“It’s important to try to maintain some sense of normalcy and structure to your day,” she said. For children and teenagers, it may be tempting to stay up late or to eat meals whenever the mood strikes.

But Dr. Yu said, “the lack of structure makes it harder to contain emotions and feelings.”

Dr. Yu echoed some of these tips for keeping anxiety at bay: Try to keep in touch with friends, and try not to worry about things that are out of your control.

And set aside time to relax.

“I’ve been trying to take my own advice,” she said.

California Today goes live at 6:30 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com. Were you forwarded this email? Sign up for California Today here and read every edition online here.

Jill Cowan grew up in Orange County, graduated from U.C. Berkeley and has reported all over the state, including the Bay Area, Bakersfield and Los Angeles — but she always wants to see more. Follow along here or on Twitter, @jillcowan.

California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and graduated from U.C. Berkeley.

<|endoftext|>

The coronavirus pandemic is an unprecedented event in modern history. That's why our reporters and editors want to hear about your experiences. Right now, we’re looking for stories related to several specific topics listed below. We also welcome you to join our ongoing reporting efforts for future stories on other topics.





Are you a medical worker on the front lines of the pandemic? We’re assembling your stories, photos and video into a larger portrait. Leer en español.

Are you living alone under quarantine? Modern Love is seeking personal stories of lives transformed by sudden solitude.

Have you lost your job, or are you an employer who has cut jobs? We’d like to hear about it.

Have you felt the pandemic’s effect on nursing homes? Share your observations.

Are you a health care worker?Tell us about your experiences and concerns about being on the front lines. (If you work in New York City, use this form.)

Have you lost someone to coronavirus? Our Obituaries desk is telling the stories of those who have died in the pandemic.

Do you have a confidential news tip? Visit nytimes.com/tips.

Have something else to contribute? Use the form at the bottom of this page.

We’ll keep this page updated with the latest ways you can contribute.

Prompted by your observations, a Times review of cases shows that about a fifth of deaths from the virus in the United States have been tied to nursing homes or other long-term care facilities.

Medical workers who shared their accounts helped us with articles about the patient surge at N.Y.C. hospitals and in the 911 system.

We found expert answers to the questions of worried parents-to-be.

Your cooking concerns inspired this Instagram story of Alison Roman’s tips on how to make substitutions while quarantined.

We appreciate your continued help.

We’re also interested in stories and experiences from people who could possibly contribute to our reporting later on. Do you have experience dealing with the effects of the outbreak that you’d like to share? Please tell us here.

<|endoftext|>

People who are delivering soon across America have planned their deliveries weeks or months in advance. But as coronavirus cases surge, many of those plans need to be completely reworked. Some hospitals have taken unprecedented steps like barring partners, relatives and doulas from the delivery room. With shelter-in-place orders, many expecting mothers may not have their safety net of family and friends around for help.

We would like to hear from parents who are delivering soon. What are your concerns about having a baby during the coronavirus outbreak? If you are giving birth in a hospital, have you been notified of new policies? How else have your birthing plans been disrupted?

Please fill out the form below. A reporter or editor may contact you to hear more about your story. We will not publish your name or comments without contacting you first.

<|endoftext|>

This is the Coronavirus Briefing, an informed guide to the global outbreak. Sign up here to get the briefing by email.

The White House is expected to announce that all Americans should wear cloth masks if they go out in public.

More than 6.6 million Americans filed for unemployment benefits last week, doubling the record set a week earlier.

The Democratic National Convention has been postponed to mid-August.

Get the latest updates here, plus maps and full coverage

U.S. employers are laying off workers at an unheard-of clip as the coronavirus outbreak plunges the economy into a deep freeze. Some 6.6 million people filed new unemployment insurance claims last week — nearly 20 times a typical week’s tally.

Experts say the figure should be even higher, but some state unemployment systems were so swamped that people couldn’t get through to file a claim. The monthly employment report for March, due on Friday, is likely to be ugly as well.

This will be a recession like no other in memory. Recessions usually start with a financial or economic crisis that prompts consumers to cut their spending; the big job losses follow over time as revenue-starved businesses slash payrolls or close their doors. But with this one, the layoffs are coming right at the start, because of stay-home orders and business restrictions.

And it will be the virus, not economic forces, that will determine when a recovery can begin. No one yet knows what that recovery will look like, or how long it will take.

Ron Lieber, the “Your Money” columnist for The Times, spoke to us about the impact of the sweeping job losses. Here are excerpts from the conversation.

What’s the first thing someone who is laid off should do?

Apply for unemployment — and you should keep trying. The new legislation allows for an extra $600 per week of assistance, and that extra money can be enough to make a difference between financial disaster and near financial calamity. And that’s why Congress offered it.

What do you tell people who are struggling to process all this?

It doesn’t look quite like anything we’ve seen before in our lifetime. Trying to plan or make predictions is really hard — and to tell people to embrace that uncertainty is not really helpful. I think the best thing is to talk to as many people as possible who have the same uncertainty that you do.

Will the U.S. economy just bounce back to where it was before, or do you expect lasting changes?

If we continue to believe that capitalism and market economics are the right way to structure our country, then there probably ought to be at least some way our economic activity will revert to some level of normalcy. I would not believe anybody who is trying to predict when that will be.

The Times is providing free access to much of our coronavirus coverage, and our Coronavirus Briefing newsletter — like all of our newsletters — is free. Please consider supporting our journalism with a subscription.

The coronavirus outbreak is playing havoc with the political calendar. Fifteen states and one territory have postponed their primaries or switched to voting by mail with longer deadlines. And the national Democratic convention in Milwaukee, where the party formally selects its presidential candidate, has been pushed back a month to mid-August, a week before the Republican convention in Charlotte, N.C.

And then there’s Wisconsin, which is moving ahead with its primary next Tuesday, despite concerns about in-person voting during a pandemic.

Perhaps those most at risk on Election Day are the state’s poll workers, who tend to be older and have health conditions that make them vulnerable, according to Nick Corasaniti of The Times, who interviewed Wisconsin poll workers.

“Almost everyone I talked to was very conflicted about the risks — and many just said: ‘You know what, it’s not worth it. I can’t show up,” Nick said. “I spoke to three who were over 70, and heartbroken that they couldn’t be there. But they said they just couldn’t put themselves at risk.”

The primary is forcing Wisconsinites to decide between public health and the right to vote, Nick said. One chief inspector told him, “Being complicit in putting public safety at risk seems a greater guilt to bear than letting democracy down.”

(If you are a Wisconsin voter, Thursday is the deadline to request an absentee ballot. You can sign up to vote by mail on the state’s elections website.)

At least 297 million Americans have been told to stay home, but millions continue to show up for work, because they can’t do their jobs from home, or can’t afford to lose income, or are considered essential to keeping the community functioning.

In their own words, workers across the country describe life in a changed world in The Times Magazine.

“I would be lying to say I’m not worried about exposure to Covid-19,” said Nikki Grigalunas, a homeless-outreach worker in Chicago. “But when I’m in the field, the first thing I’m thinking about is helping our people cope. We make sure that somebody sees them. We hold hope.”

The Times reporter Jan Hoffman and the photographer Chang W. Lee rode along with a special unit of emergency medical workers in Paterson, N.J., as they responded to 911 calls for suspected coronavirus cases.

The responders worked by three rules: Don’t go in a home, don’t touch the patient, and don’t take anyone to the hospital unless it’s absolutely necessary.

Stay-at-home orders have many Americans staying put, but people who live in areas without restrictions have kept in motion, according to a Times analysis of anonymous cellphone data from 15 million people.

Not all trips are problematic: Driving a few miles to pick up groceries would not violate stay-at-home orders. But in general, moving around more leads to more contact with others and more chances to catch or spread the disease, researchers said.

New York State has only enough ventilators to last six more days, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said. New York City has set up 45 new mobile morgues, and crematories are now allowed to work around the clock.

Britain reported 569 deaths on Thursday, the highest daily tally to date, raising the national toll to 2,921.

In France, where more than 5,300 people have died because of the epidemic, a hall at the world’s largest wholesale food market, near Paris, will be turned into a temporary morgue.

Lend a hand to those in need. Local newspapers and websites are aggregating ways you can give or receive help. Here are a few other lists with ways to help.

Stop trying to be productive. You do not have to write the next great American novel or get in the best shape of your life with all your “extra time.” Sometimes, attending to basic needs is plenty.

Channel your anxiety. Stress is bad for you only if you believe it’s bad for you, according to research. Try this three-step guide for adopting a “stress-is-enhancing” mind-set.

Embrace the ethos of travel. Cook your way through a French cookbook, lean into fantasy worlds or use an app to discover local wildlife. Our latest 36 Hours column has more travel-inspired activities for those sheltering in place.

Donate to organizations on the front lines

For more than 100 years, The Times has raised donations for charity through our Neediest Cases Fund. Now we’re starting a special initiative: the Covid-19 Relief Campaign. Proceeds will go to organizations on the front lines of the pandemic. Learn more, and donate, here.

The U.S. approved a test for coronavirus antibodies, which could tell doctors whether a patient may have acquired some immunity.

New data from the C.D.C. shows the lag between when people become infected and when they start to feel symptoms.

An irony for farm workers: They’ve been told the nation needs them to keep working despite stay-at-home orders. But because most are undocumented immigrants, that means the authorities consider them both illegal and “essential.”

The Navy removed the captain of the aircraft carrier Theodore Roosevelt after he sounded the alarm to superiors about a coronavirus outbreak on the ship and his letter was leaked.

The C.I.A. has told White House officials that China is undercounting its coronavirus numbers.

Dr. Anthony Fauci, the infectious disease expert on the White House task force, talked about containing the virus and why he feels as though he’s making decisions in “the fog of war” on today’s episode of “The Daily.”

I established a virtual faculty lounge using Google Classroom where my teaching “family” can trade ideas, share resources, vent, and just touch each other virtually to stay connected as we dive into the unknown with distance teaching and learning.

— Linda Brennan, Baltimore

Let us know how you’re dealing with the outbreak. Send us a response here, and we may feature it in an upcoming newsletter.

Sign up here to get the briefing by email.

Remy Tumin and Jonathan Wolfe helped write today’s newsletter. Melina Delkic contributed reporting.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — American military commanders are using the restrictions imposed by the spread of the coronavirus to reshape the deployment of Special Operations troops all over the world, according to military officials. The decisions mean the withdrawal of elite commandos from some conflict zones and shuttering longstanding missions.

The directives, the officials said, serve two purposes: to reduce the strain on a small but often-deployed portion of the U.S. military after more than 18 years of war, and to contend with the risk of operating alongside local forces in countries flooded with the coronavirus.

These initiatives, started by a handful of generals, provide a preview of what the entire American military might look like in the aftermath of the coronavirus crisis. The actions also reflect the thinking of some commanders who see the uncertainty surrounding the pandemic as an opportunity to streamline their forces, cut missions they view as unnecessary and reorient commandos to higher priority operations.

“The crisis is a good opportunity to review our priorities and the value and opportunity costs of all of our efforts,” said Col. Mark E. Mitchell, a retired Green Beret commander who until November was the Pentagon’s top Special Operations policy official.

The moves align with the philosophy of Defense Secretary Mark T. Esper, who has long pushed for ending American missions in far-flung parts of the globe to better focus forces toward Russia and China. But it has created some strains within commands that have been reluctant to lose troops.

In Afghanistan, Gen. Austin S. Miller, the commander of American forces there, is looking to cut down troops even more from the current goal of 8,600 by withdrawing some of those assigned to train and work with Afghan forces. Nearly a half-dozen Special Forces teams — each with roughly 12 Army Green Berets — have been cut since February.

The move was prompted by expectations that cases of the coronavirus would most likely continue to emerge within the Afghan ranks for an indefinite period, presenting a danger to American troops and their relatively small medical infrastructure that was not worth the risk, military officials said.

In Iraq, the American-led coalition has handed over three bases to Iraqi security forces in recent weeks, allowing commanders to pull Special Operations forces back to a handful of larger bases or assign them outside the country.

In a statement, the coalition headquarters in Iraq attributed the drawdown to threats from the growing coronavirus pandemic and a winding down of efforts to train Iraqi forces in the fight against pockets of remaining Islamic State fighters throughout much of the country’s west and northwest.

“To prevent potential spread of Covid-19, the Iraqi security forces have suspended all training,” the coalition said in a statement on March 20. “As a result, the coalition will temporarily return some of its training-focused forces to their own countries in the coming days and weeks.”

Months before the pandemic, U.S. commanders in Iraq, at the urging of Mr. Esper, had drawn up plans to cut American presence in the country to about 2,500 troops from more than 5,000 now.

Those plans took on greater urgency after Iranian-backed militias stepped up deadly rocket attacks against American forces on Iraqi bases, leading to the drone strike in early January at Baghdad International Airport that killed Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani, a top Iranian commander. General Suleimani’s killing prompted many in Iraq’s Parliament to call for an ouster of U.S. troops from the country, and spurred the Shiite militias to again ramp up their rocket attacks.

Against this backdrop of increased security risks, a pandemic and political tensions, American commanders are taking hard looks at what “mission critical” tasks still remain for their forces in Iraq.

The question of prioritizing Special Operations missions, and not wanting those elite troops idled by a pandemic or political tensions, is one that American commanders worldwide are weighing in secure video conferences with staff on a weekly basis, one senior American general said. The discussions are an inevitable byproduct of a 60-day global no-travel order, issued by the Pentagon, that has allowed many commanders to look at their array of missions and question which are worth continuing.

But some operations with local security forces continue.

In Somalia, for instance, American Special Operations forces are conducting airstrikes and helping Somalian security forces carry out ground raids against Shabab militants aligned with Al Qaeda, considered the most dangerous terrorist threat on the continent. “We are not taking our focus off our operations,” Brig. Gen. Dagvin R.M. Anderson, who commands all American Special Operations forces in Africa, said in an interview.

Even before the pandemic, Special Operations commanders had started re-examining many of their missions with more rigor than previous periodic reviews, officials said.

One main reason is that Mr. Esper is in the early phases of reviewing global deployments that could reshuffle thousands of troops, including Special Operations forces.

Among them, Mr. Esper is weighing proposals for a major reduction of American forces in East and West Africa. An overhaul of deployments in Latin America is also underway.

In West Africa, the primary mission for Special Operations forces has been to train and assist West African security forces to try to suppress Islamist groups like Boko Haram and offshoots of Al Qaeda and the Islamic State.

Mr. Esper’s team has questioned the value of those efforts and wants to scale back missions to counter militants who lack the demonstrated ability and intent to attack the United States on its own soil, the officials said. No terrorist group operating in West Africa is said to meet this heightened assessment standard.

In the past year, the Pentagon has shrunk its forces in Africa by reducing several hundred Special Operations troops on the continent as part of the troop shift.

<|endoftext|>

This is the Coronavirus Briefing, an informed guide to the global outbreak. Sign up here to get the briefing by email.

The U.N. secretary general says the coronavirus poses the gravest threat to humanity since World War II.

The federal government’s emergency stockpile of masks, gloves and gowns is nearly empty.

Wimbledon, the oldest Grand Slam tennis tournament, is canceled for this year.

Get the latest updates here, plus maps and full coverage.

Experts have long been eyeing Florida as a ticking time bomb in the coronavirus pandemic, because it has so many older residents (a quarter of the population is over 60), and it gets so many visitors from around the world (125 million annually), especially at this time of year.

Still, for weeks Gov. Ron DeSantis resisted calls for the kinds of sweeping statewide restrictions imposed elsewhere to slow the virus. Following President Trump’s lead, Mr. DeSantis tried to play down the pandemic, and to keep it at bay by discouraging visitors from hot spots like New York City and New Orleans.

But the state’s case count kept soaring, and images of its crowded beaches and spring-break partying drew mounting criticism. Frustrated local officials started imposing their own restrictions.

Mr. DeSantis finally changed his mind and issued a statewide stay-at-home order on Wednesday after a phone call with Mr. Trump. A day earlier, the White House had warned that 100,000 people or more might die in the U.S. before the pandemic ebbs, and on Sunday, Mr. Trump extended federal social-distancing guidelines through the end of April.

Georgia, Mississippi, Nevada and Pennsylvania also issued statewide orders on Wednesday; Texas is the largest remaining holdout.

Incoming: Still looming is what to do about two cruise ships at sea near Florida with coronavirus cases on board, including two deaths. Governor DeSantis has been trying to keep them from docking, saying that the state needs all of its resources for its own citizens. Past evacuations of stricken cruise ships haven’t always gone well.

The Times is providing free access to much of our coronavirus coverage, and our Coronavirus Briefing newsletter — like all of our newsletters — is free. Please consider supporting our journalism with a subscription.

The urgency of the crisis has led to a new level of global scientific collaboration: Never have so many experts in so many countries focused simultaneously on one topic. What we know about the virus, and how to treat it, is expanding every day.

We are also learning a lot more about what we don’t know — like exactly who has the coronavirus. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention now believes that as many as 25 percent of infected people may show no symptoms, significantly more than earlier estimates.

“This helps explain how rapidly this virus continues to spread across the country,” the agency’s director, Dr. Robert Redfield, told NPR on Tuesday.

Moreover, research out of China has found a high rate of false negatives: Around 30 percent of people who are tested and told they are negative may actually have the virus. It may be necessary to test twice to be sure.

In an article for The Times, Dr. Harlan Krumholz, a professor of medicine at Yale, suggests that “if you have had likely exposures, and symptoms suggest Covid-19 infection, you probably have it — even if your test is negative.”

Some good news in drug trials: A small study of 62 patients in China with mild cases showed promising results for the malaria drug hydroxychloroquine: patients who received it seemed to get over their symptoms faster. 

And doctors around the world noticed that some Covid-19 patients seemed to experience “cytokine storms,” which is when their immune systems kept raging after the virus was defeated. That led them to try the drug tocilizumab, with early signs of success. The F.D.A. has approved testing in the U.S.

The Zoom videoconferencing app has become a fixture in the lives of millions of Americans who are sheltering at home and are using it to connect to work, school, family, friends, worship services and digital happy hours. But recent reports are raising questions about the company’s security and privacy practices.

Motherboard reported last week that the Zoom iPhone app was sending user data to Facebook, even if the user didn’t have a Facebook account. (Zoom said it would remove the tracking software.)

The New York attorney general requested information from the company this week about its security practices, and took note of past security flaws “that could enable malicious third parties to, among other things, gain surreptitious access to consumer webcams.”

Another issue is “zoombombing” — when trolls hijack meetings to display graphic or disturbing images. The Boston office of the F.B.I. issued a warning about the practice this week after several Massachusetts schools reported that classes had been zoombombed with pornography, white-supremacist imagery and threatening language.

Jennifer St. Sume, a doctoral student in Washington, attended a virtual book club that lasted only 30 minutes before someone began blasting graphic content on the screen. “If I’m going to be asked to live in Zoom University or Zoom Tavern, then I want to know that it’s secure for everyone,” she said.

If you are hosting meetings, Zoom has tips and advice for keeping out crashers. Or you can switch to a competing service, like Google Hangouts, Facebook Messenger, Apple’s FaceTime or Marco Polo. And here’s our best advice for having a great video meeting.

The Times is now collecting county-by-county data on coronavirus infections and deaths, with a dedicated page for every state. You can find yours here.

Iran, which has more than 47,000 cases and more than 3,000 deaths, said American-backed trade sanctions were making its outbreak worse and called on the United Nations to lift them.

Twenty-eight Texas college students who traveled together to Mexico for spring break have now tested positive.

President Rodrigo Duterte of the Philippines threatened to have the police and the military shoot people who protested the nation’s lockdown orders.

The president of Brazil, Jair Bolsonaro, is the only major world leader continuing to question the need for social distancing measures. He said Brazilians could weather the pandemic because they could be dunked in raw sewage and “don’t catch a thing.”

Keep walking. Even if it’s just around your living room. Taking 4,000 more steps a day — even slow leisurely steps — can significantly decrease your risk of dying early from heart disease, cancer and other causes, a recent study found.

Designate a set of “inside clothes.” Taking off shoes when you get home and changing into clothes you don’t wear outdoors is a good idea. When you do laundry, use gloves if you can, wipe down the laundry basket afterward and use the highest possible heat setting for the water.

Travel without going anywhere. Get vicarious vacation sensations on your TV with these 18 international thrillers, comedies, dramas and documentaries.

Get into gaming. If you’re not a video gamer, or it’s been a while since you have picked up a controller, our guide is full of tips for exploring the world of interactive entertainment. We even suggest the best games based on your interests.

Join our DealBook team for a conversation

The writers and editors behind DealBook will host a virtual discussion with Maggie Haberman, our White House correspondent, about the Trump administration’s response to the coronavirus crisis on Thursday at 11 a.m. Eastern time. R.S.V.P. to join them here.

The Trump administration decided against reopening the Affordable Care Act’s Healthcare.gov marketplaces to new customers, which would have made it easier for people who had recently lost jobs to obtain health insurance.

From licking objects to coughing on people or willfully violating the six-foot rule, coronavirus agitators are acting out — and often facing harsh consequences.

In the United States, people are hoarding toilet paper and clogging sewer systems with wipes of all kinds. Is it time for Americans to embrace the bidet?

On Tech, a new Times newsletter, will explore how technology is transforming our lives and our world. Check out the first edition, which asks whether the internet has gotten nicer during the pandemic.

I sent a Nintendo Switch Lite to my 80-year-old mother who must shelter alone. My teenage children taught their grandmother how to set it up and play via FaceTime and now keep her company while playing “Animal Crossing” virtually.

— Jeff F., Connecticut

Let us know how you’re dealing with the outbreak. Send us a response here, and we may feature it in an upcoming newsletter.

Sign up here to get the briefing by email.

Jonathan Wolfe and Tom Wright-Piersanti helped write today’s newsletter.

Email your thoughts to briefing@nytimes.com. Did a friend forward you the briefing? Sign up here.

<|endoftext|>

Faced with budget pressures and an invigorated gun control movement, the National Rifle Association has found a new cause amid the pandemic — fighting to keep gun stores open as its fund-raising appeals depict the government’s coronavirus response as a threat to Second Amendment rights.

On Thursday, the group sued the State of New York over its decision to include gun retailers among the many businesses that have been forced to close during the crisis. The N.R.A. had already filed two suits against California, where the governor had left the decision to counties.

The suits come as the N.R.A. and other gun groups have successfully lobbied the White House to get the Department of Homeland Security to add firearms vendors to its list of essential businesses. That prompted states like New Jersey to reverse course and allow such stores to remain open. But New York, the epicenter of the outbreak in the United States, has resisted, viewing the shutdown of businesses across the state as a vital safety measure.

“There isn’t a single person who has ever used a gun in self-defense who would consider it nonessential,” the N.R.A.’s chief executive, Wayne LaPierre, said in a statement, calling the shutdown of gun stores an assault “on our Second Amendment freedoms.”

Letitia James, the attorney general of New York, said in a statement that “everyone — including the N.R.A. — must follow the law and all executive orders of New York.”

“We will aggressively defend the state against yet another legal assault by the N.R.A.,” she added.

Heading into the pandemic, gun control groups viewed 2020 as an opportunity. Their spending has been surging in recent elections, and Everytown for Gun Safety, whose biggest backer has been Michael R. Bloomberg, plans to spend $60 million this year across the ballot.

By contrast, the N.R.A. has been in a weakened position. While it played a pivotal role in the 2016 race, spending $30 million to help elect President Trump, it has more recently been sapped by internal dissent, litigation and outside investigations, and was already seen as unlikely to match that figure this year.

Over the past several months, the White House and the Trump campaign have hedged their bets by more aggressively reaching out to other gun groups. While the N.R.A.’s pre-eminence remains, in part because of its ability to mobilize supporters, it faced further challenges when the pandemic forced it to cancel its convention, an important source of revenue, as well as a number of fund-raising events, leading to a round of layoffs and to pay cuts of at least 20 percent across the organization.

“We’re all confronting this,” Andrew Arulanandam, a spokesman for the N.R.A., said in an interview. “The convention was millions of dollars,” adding that “just like everyone else, we’re facing a loss of revenue.”

But demand for firearms has been surging as lines form at some gun stores during the pandemic, with background checks rising more than 40 percent in March from a year earlier, developments seen as an opportunity by the N.R.A.

“This has brought new people into the gun rights movement,” Mr. Arulanandam said. The surge in sales, he said, would “end up strengthening us.”

The group has been retooling its strategy. Many on the right played down the virus, including at the N.R.A. — Willes Lee, the board’s second vice president, called it an “election ploy.” But the organization itself has focused on the ramifications of the sweeping response in many states, sending out messages to its supporters with headlines like “COVID-19: Threat to Second Amendment” and “Pandemic Exposes Dangers of So-Called ‘Universal’ Background Checks.”

On Wednesday, the N.R.A. tweeted about the sharp rise in gun sales: "what do they expect when they are releasing inmates while closing gun shops during a pandemic.” The group has also circulated a video in which a disabled woman holding an assault weapon issues a warning to people buying extra food: “If you aren’t preparing to defend your property when everything goes wrong, you’re really just stockpiling for somebody else.”

Such sentiments are maddening to the N.R.A.’s opponents.

“They’re mired in crisis, strapped for cash, and so revert to the old playbook — fearmongering about the collapse of society — in order to raise money,” said John Feinblatt, the president of Everytown, adding that the N.R.A. was trying to convince people that “apocalypse is on its way.”

The lawsuit against New York is the N.R.A.’s latest legal battle with the state. In February, regulators charged the company with improperly selling insurance in the state without a license. For the past year, the N.R.A., a nonprofit chartered in New York, has been under investigation by the office of Ms. James, who is examining allegations of corruption and self-dealing. The N.R.A. has also sued the state, claiming that Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo and his administration improperly pressured banks and insurers to stop doing business with the gun group.

As the two sides of the firearms debate prepare to square off in the 2020 election, gun control groups have rallied around the likely Democratic nominee, former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. Guns are one of the rare issues on which Mr. Biden has more progressive credentials than his remaining rival, Senator Bernie Sanders, who comes from a rural state, Vermont, and has had a cautious approach to gun control.

But for gun groups, Mr. Biden has become a polarizing figure. Last month, the N.R.A. seized on Mr. Biden’s confrontation with a gun owner at a Michigan assembly plant. Gun activists were also incensed when Mr. Biden embraced former Representative Beto O’Rourke at a Texas rally earlier this year, promising, “You’re going to take care of the gun problem with me.” Mr. O’Rourke took the hardest line on gun control during his presidential bid, proposing not just to end sales of assault weapons but to confiscate existing ones.

The election will be a test for the N.R.A. and for Mr. LaPierre. Amid the N.R.A.’s troubles last year, the White House increased its contacts with other organizations.

“They are reaching out to other gun rights groups for this election,” Alan Gottlieb, head of the Second Amendment Foundation, said in an interview earlier this year. Mr. Gottlieb said that he had come to the West Wing in December and met with officials there, though not Mr. Trump, and that he separately met with Trump campaign officials last fall and had been in contact since.

“The fact they have been reaching out as much as they have been, since things started internally at the N.R.A., one has to assume that they want to stay plugged in to the gun rights constituency,” he said.

Several organizations, along with the N.R.A., were involved in the lobbying effort to have gun stores declared essential.

“We talked to a number of folks at the White House and Homeland Security,” said Lawrence Keane, general counsel for the National Shooting Sports Foundation, a trade group. “The ability to exercise your constitutional rights begins at the retail counter. If you can’t purchase at the retail counter, your rights are denied.”

<|endoftext|>

The top Republican on the House Intelligence Committee this week criticized closing schools in his home state, California, as “way overkill” — even as President Trump came to a reckoning over the number of people who could die during the coronavirus pandemic.

The lawmaker, Representative Devin G. Nunes, played down the gravity of the outbreak during a Tuesday night appearance on Fox News.

“Look, the schools were just canceled out here in California, which is way overkill,” Mr. Nunes said. “It’s possible kids could have went back to school in two weeks to four weeks, but they just canceled the rest of the schools.”

On Wednesday, Mr. Nunes, 46, who represents parts of Tulare and Fresno Counties, started trending on Twitter because of his comments, which were widely condemned.

Mr. Nunes’s criticism of stay-at-home orders came hours after Mr. Trump said that the United States was facing “a very, very painful two weeks.” At the same White House briefing on Tuesday, top public health officials warned that as many as 240,000 people in the country could die from the virus.

During the Fox interview, Mr. Nunes continued to press for reopening parts of the country in the coming weeks, a view previously held by Mr. Trump.

“We have to focus on keeping people employed,” he said. “I will tell you this, if we don’t start to get people back to work in this country over the next week to two weeks, I don’t believe that we can wait until the end of April.”

Gov. Gavin Newsom of California, who ordered the 40 million residents of his state to stay at home on March 19, told CNN on Wednesday that the social distancing measures were vital to preventing the spread of the virus. He said that those states that had not issued stay-at-home orders needed to act.

“Our message is this: What are you waiting for?” Mr. Newsom said. “What more evidence do you need?”

This is not the first time that Mr. Nunes has been criticized for playing down the outbreak, which has killed at least 4,576 people and sickened more than 200,000 in the United States.

During another appearance on Fox News in mid-March, Mr. Nunes encouraged healthy Americans to continue to eat out at restaurants to soften the economic blow of the pandemic, contradicting the recommendations of health experts on social distancing.

On Tuesday, Mr. Nunes accused politicians and the media of fueling hysteria over the outbreak.

“Let’s stop looking at the death counters and let’s talk about how we can keep as many people employed as possible,” he said. “When you have people staying at home not taking care of themselves, you will end up with a hell of a lot more people dying by other causes than you will by the coronavirus.”

Mr. Nunes rose to prominence during the early part of the investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 presidential election. At the time, he was chairman of the House Intelligence Committee but lost the gavel to Representative Adam B. Schiff of California when Democrats reclaimed control of the House in the 2018 midterm elections.

<|endoftext|>

This is the Coronavirus Briefing, an informed guide to the global outbreak. Sign up here to get the briefing by email.

The virus has now sickened more than a million people worldwide. Four billion people — roughly half of humanity — have been told to stay at home.

The C.D.C. recommended all Americans wear cloth masks in public.

New York has recorded more than 100,000 cases and nearly 3,000 deaths. State officials are pleading for more ventilators and health care workers.

Get the latest updates here, plus maps and full coverage

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention advised all Americans — even people who appear to be healthy — to cover their face with a mask or a scarf when they leave home to help slow the spread of the coronavirus in the United States.

But President Trump, speaking at an afternoon news conference, stressed that the recommendation was voluntary and said he was “choosing not to do it.”

So far, the increased demand for masks far outstrips the supply. That has left desperate people, and hospitals, navigating a marketplace rife with profiteers and scammers.

U.S. states and hospitals, whose normal suppliers are overwhelmed, have been left to negotiate directly with Chinese suppliers, which make most of the world’s masks. To fill the void, middlemen have rushed in. N95 masks, usually 50 cents apiece, were offered to one hospital for nearly $5 each by a company in Massachusetts, which itself had bought them from a Chinese manufacturer for $4.75.

Hoarding has also affected the supply chain. This week, federal authorities seized a medical stockpile that included more than 320,000 masks from a man in Brooklyn.

To free up supply for American health care workers, Mr. Trump may stop 3M from exporting surgical masks and claim more of the ones it makes abroad for domestic use. 3M argued that such a move would be counterproductive, forcing other countries to follow suit and cut off exports.

Want to make your own mask? We have a step-by-step guide for sewing one with common household materials.

The Times is providing free access to much of our coronavirus coverage, and our Coronavirus Briefing newsletter — like all of our newsletters — is free. Please consider supporting our journalism with a subscription.

America’s wealth gap is on prime display in the spread of the coronavirus, with richer people more likely to limit their movement — and thus their exposure to the outbreak.

Smartphone location data analyzed by The New York Times offers real-time evidence of a divide laid bare by the pandemic: Wealthier people not only have more job security and benefits but also may be better able to avoid becoming sick.

“The thing that struck me is that in every major city, the wealthy got a head start sheltering, in some cities up to a week before,” said Gabriel Dance, deputy investigations editor at The Times, who performed the analysis along with his colleagues Jennifer Valentino-DeVries and Denise Lu.

Many of the nation’s essential workers — in health care and public safety roles, as well as caregivers, delivery drivers, grocery clerks and plumbers — are being asked to put themselves at risk for relatively low wages, while white-collar workers are more able to work from home.

“People want to talk about this virus as an equal-opportunity pathogen, but it’s really not,” said Dr. Ashwin Vasan, a doctor and public health professor at Columbia University. “It’s going right to the fissures in our society.”

As hospitals in New York confront a surge of coronavirus cases, they’re also dealing with an acute shortage of doctors and nurses.

A major redeployment is underway: Neurosurgeons and cardiologists and dermatology and plastic surgery residents are being pulled from their regular service and into emergency rooms and intensive care wards.

One of the largest hospital networks in New York went as far as to give its doctors an ultimatum: either help with the coronavirus crush or stay home without pay.

The coronavirus is taking lives at a devastating pace in New York, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said, with deaths nearly doubling in just three days — 2,935 people had died as of Friday, up from 1,550 on Tuesday. More people in New York died from the virus in the last 24 hours — 562 — than in the first 27 days of March. Here’s the latest.

In an Op-Ed, Mayor Bill de Blasio called for a national draft of doctors and other medical workers to help places where coronavirus has hit hardest — starting in New York.

The U.S.N.S. Comfort, the Navy hospital ship that arrived in New York Harbor with much fanfare this week, was supposed to help relieve the city’s hospitals. But the ship’s 1,000 beds remain largely unused because of a tangle of bureaucratic hurdles.

“If I’m blunt about it, it’s a joke,” said Michael Dowling, the head of Northwell Health, New York’s largest hospital system.

The World Health Organization has warned of an uncontrollable spread in the Middle East. In a region comprising 22 countries, cases nearly doubled to more than 58,000 over the last week.

Britain reported 3,605 deaths on Friday, up 684 from the previous day, marking its deadliest 24-hour period yet. It is considering an “immunity passport,” which would allow patients who have recovered and produced antibodies to return to work.

After an unorthodox soft approach to the virus, Sweden is now logging more than 500 cases a day, and its public health agency has ramped up social distancing recommendations.

Talk about something else. Here are some conversation starters for your virtual happy hour.

Find joy through food. Five writers and editors from the Food section talk about stretching dollars, safe grocery shopping and go-to comfort meals.

Help struggling artists. Here are some ideas: Buy books or art, donate directly to restaurant workers in need or attend a live-streamed workshop or class.

Reimagine how your home functions. With your family housebound 24 hours a day, here are some tips to keep your appliances functioning, the mess to a minimum and the clutter at bay.

A virtual discussion of the 2020 election

Join our politics team on Monday at 4 p.m. Eastern as they discuss how the coronavirus outbreak has upended the presidential campaign. Register for the call here.

The Labor Department reported that employers shed 701,000 jobs in March, the first monthly dip in over a decade. (The numbers were collected in the first half of the month, before stay-at-home orders began, which will most likely send the total soaring next month.)

The toilet paper shortage isn’t just about hoarding. With much of the country on lockdown, people are using the bathroom exclusively at home, rather than at work, school or restaurants.

Does Covid-19 hit women and men differently? Data from other countries shows that more men are dying from the virus, but the U.S. isn’t keeping track.

“Bad news wrapped in protein”: Here’s a visual look inside the coronavirus genome.

A bit of good news: A Brooklyn landlord canceled April rent for 80 apartments to help alleviate stress.

One group is blissfully unaware of the crisis facing the world: zoo animals. The Bronx Zoo is empty, but the animals don’t seem to mind.

I planted a few dozen pumpkin and butternut squash seeds in a makeshift planter. I live in an old stone house with no garden so I positioned the planter in front of my bedroom window and watered it regularly. Yesterday little pale green mounds started pushing up the soil. Today I have a dozen or more green ears ready to unfold over the coming days.

—Circe Bosch, Nérac, France

Let us know how you’re dealing with the outbreak. Send us a response here, and we may feature it in an upcoming newsletter.

And don’t forget to take a minute to breathe this weekend.

Adam Pasick contributed to today’s newsletter.

<|endoftext|>

Now that the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has encouraged Americans to wear masks when they venture outside, more state and local politicians have begun donning the protective gear themselves, standing in contrast to President Trump, who says the masks aren’t his style.

The politicians are showing off their masks in selfies, on jogs or at city meetings, sometimes as an explicit effort to lead by example — and sometimes simply to stay safe from the coronavirus and protect others. In some cities, residents are required to cover their faces when they leave their homes.

Gov. Jared Polis of Colorado secured a colorful piece of cloth to his face emblazoned with the state’s trademark “C” logo, and encouraged residents to do the same.

“This is really going to be, for the foreseeable future, an important part of our culture in Colorado,” said Mr. Polis, a Democrat.

In Pennsylvania, Lt. Gov. John Fetterman, a Democrat, posted a photograph of himself on Twitter with a frayed, gray piece of cloth wrapped around his face, and wondered if it would scare fellow joggers away.

The efforts clash with comments from Mr. Trump, who emphasized on Friday that the C.D.C. recommendation to wear cloth masks was voluntary and that he didn’t plan to follow along.

“Somehow, sitting in the Oval Office behind that beautiful Resolute Desk — the great Resolute Desk — I think wearing a face mask as I greet presidents, prime ministers, dictators, kings, queens, I don’t know,” he said. “Somehow I don’t see it for myself. I just don’t.”

Although the federal guidance is only a recommendation, some municipalities are taking things a step further, requiring residents to cover their faces when they are out and about.

The City Council in Lancaster, Calif., north of Los Angeles, on Friday required that residents wear masks, scarves or other coverings when they patronize or work at essential businesses that remain open, according to The Antelope Valley Press.

“We will start issuing tickets for misdemeanors if it comes down to that,” said Mayor R. Rex Parris, a Republican, according to the local newspaper report. “We are not going to allow anyone in our city to endanger the lives of our hardworking families. And anyone who is not wearing a mask, that is precisely what you’re doing.”

In Laredo, Texas, the City Council passed an ordinance that requires anyone who enters a building that is not their home or a bus to cover their mouth and nose, according to The Laredo Morning Times. If they refuse, they could be fined up to $1,000.

“I’d rather bury them in debt than bury them in a coffin,” Councilman George Altgelt said in response to worries that the fine was too harsh, the newspaper reported.

Even in cities where the recommendation is still just that — a recommendation — many local politicians are strapping on their own gear to urge the practice.

In Los Angeles, Mayor Eric Garcetti brought an all-black mask to a news conference this week, pulling it up too high — briefly covering his eyes — before triumphantly getting the straps to stay over his ears.

“Excuse me,” he said, his voice muffled by the mask. “This will be the look.”

Svante Myrick, the Democratic mayor of Ithaca, N.Y., said he had dug around in a drawer to retrieve an American flag-themed mask his mother had bought for him months ago.

“I thought she was overreacting,” he wrote alongside a selfie from the roof of City Hall. It was another example, he said, of why “we should always listen to mothers.”

Julie Bosman and Campbell Robertson contributed reporting.

<|endoftext|>

Hi. Welcome to On Politics, your guide to the day in national politics. I’m Lisa Lerer, your host.

Sign up here to get On Politics in your inbox every weekday.

Amid all the bleak news about the coronavirus pandemic, it’s important to remember that there are so many heroes in America right now.

Of course, there are the E.R. doctors, the I.C.U. nurses and all the health care workers who are on the front lines at hospitals, some of which are in “apocalyptic” condition.

But there are other, less heralded heroes. The orderlies changing the sheets in the hospitals. The workers stocking shelves and making deliveries. Home health aides, cleaners, child care providers, security guards, postal workers, garbage collectors — all these people risk their health to keep America fed, protected and cared for.

The national politics reporter Jennifer Medina brings us the story of one of them: Ezzie Dominguez, a mother of two in Denver, who is a member of the National Domestic Workers Alliance, an association for nannies, caregivers and house cleaners.

For years, Ms. Dominguez, 38, has worked as a nanny and cleaned houses around the city. A few weeks ago, the family she has been working for told her to stop coming but did not offer to pay her. Her husband lost his jobs as a cook and a janitor around the same time and cannot collect unemployment benefits because he is an undocumented immigrant.

Families like Ms. Dominguez’s are some of the most economically vulnerable in the country. She considers herself lucky because she still has a part-time job at a small nonprofit, which gives the family health insurance. But it’s not enough, she said, to pay for diapers for her 2-year-old son and food for her 15-year-old, “who eats like a horse.”

So for now, she is working for a subcontractor cleaning offices and hospitals at night. Here is Jenny’s conversation with Ms. Dominguez about what her life is like now. (As usual, it has been edited and condensed.)

Tell us about your work right now. What are you doing?

MS. DOMINGUEZ We’ve been going in to clean and sanitize buildings that are essential to support the public. We’re like on-scene little soldiers, going in, scrubbing down and then disappearing, mostly staying invisible. People don’t even understand how it happens and we’re exposing ourselves and risking our lives. But I have no choice — we lost more than half of our income. My income is the only one, for who knows how long. I have to do something.

There’s a shortage of cleaning personnel who have experience with pathogens, so as long as I am healthy I will do this. We get a message every night saying they have a building and need a certain number of people. It’s mostly hospitals. We are paid $10 an hour in cash, and you get paid as soon as you’re done.

How concerned are you about getting sick because you are working in these public buildings?

I am terrified, because I am in cancer remission. Every day they check our temperatures, but we are still risking a lot. And we are risking a lot for our families. When I get home, I have a little room I enter, I get down to my underwear and bra, washing everything separately. Then I jump in the shower immediately. I think I started to irritate my skin because how much I am scrubbing and using disinfectant. My hands are starting to crack.

Then I kind of hunker on my corner of the bed and stay there, because I am still afraid of touching my husband. I sleep for a couple of hours and then get up to start my job at the nonprofit. Normally I do a lot of organizing; right now I sort mail and donations and deal with any deliveries. I took the job five months ago and I am grateful I have it.

My husband had been working at the same place for 20 years before he was laid off. And he cannot apply for unemployment because he is undocumented. I really panicked when he lost his job, which is why I am doing the cleaning. We’re not in a space where I can say no to anything. You clean as fast as you can and get out of there.

Are you given any kind of protective gear when you clean?

No, and at first I didn’t even realize that we were going to clean hospitals. The calls just started coming and you just reply to say you want to work. They didn’t say they were going to give us anything special. They gave us two gloves and two little aprons and whatever cleaning supplies. A lot of times they don’t tell you what chemicals they are using, and that worries me, too. They get upset at me because they say I ask a lot of questions.

How did the family you had been working for tell you they no longer wanted you to come?

I have been working for them for two years. It’s a divorced couple and I am kind of like a secondary mom for the children. They have special needs and the father needs the help at his home. They just said they didn’t want me to come anymore and that they would call me when I can come back. Then they told me they could not contribute anything to me while I am not coming.

What do you wish people understood about your work right now?

It’s a huge sacrifice. I know I can die if we are exposed, but we are also going to die if we don’t have basic needs. We need the stability of an earned income no matter what. We should not be invisible, but we are all humans, too. We have families and we should be able to have sick leave, so that we can stay home and take care of them. We should not have to choose between working and living.

I want Congress to include us, to give us help, too. A crisis is not the time we should say, you need to have documents to have the basic necessities. We should not be excluded from everything. The system is so broken and does not include people like us, even when we are called essential.

Drop us a line!

We want to hear from our readers. Have a question? We’ll try to answer it. Have a comment? We’re all ears. Email us at onpolitics@nytimes.com.

Times Opinion has been concentrating on the perspectives of many people directly affected by the coronavirus pandemic — emergency medical workers, infected patients, grocery store clerks and local officials. But we’ve also been keeping tabs on the political ramifications of the crisis.

Last week, in the Debatable newsletter (which you can sign up for here), Spencer Bokat-Lindell covered the mixed reception for Congress’s $2 trillion relief package among economists, commentators and elected representatives. In an interesting convergence, Representative Justin Amash, a libertarian, and Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, a democratic socialist, had similar criticisms of the measure.

The package is “a raw deal for the people,” Mr. Amash argued. “It does far too little for those who need the most help, while providing hundreds of billions in corporate welfare.”

This week, Thomas Edsall, a longtime contributing writer, explored the likelihood that “the coronavirus crisis will determine whether Trump is a one-term president.” He talked to pollsters and noted a revealing Pew Research survey that showed “significantly higher percentages of young people, minorities, low-wage earners and Democrats reported adverse impacts on their households” — defined as someone losing a job or pay as a result of Covid-19 — “than did older, white, high-income Republican respondents.”

In an interview with Mr. Edsall, Lee Drutman, a senior fellow at the New America Foundation, predicted that “there will be lots of blame to go around” and “that blame will almost certainly fuel even more partisan politics.”

— Talmon Joseph Smith

The new Peloton moms? N.F.L., N.B.A. and P.G.A. players embrace the bike.

Thanks for reading. On Politics is your guide to the political news cycle, delivering clarity from the chaos.

On Politics is also available as a newsletter. Sign up here to get it delivered to your inbox.

Is there anything you think we’re missing? Anything you want to see more of? We’d love to hear from you. Email us at onpolitics@nytimes.com.

<|endoftext|>

SEATTLE — A nursing home linked to dozens of coronavirus deaths in the Seattle area faces a fine of more than $600,000 and other sanctions after federal and state inspectors found a range of problems in how the facility handled the outbreak.

The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services said in a letter on Wednesday to the facility, Life Care Center of Kirkland, that it may be terminated from Medicare and Medicaid participation if it is unable to come into compliance with federal regulations by September. Officials levied a fine of $13,585 per day covering a span of about six weeks.

The state Department of Social and Health Services issued its own findings, halting new admissions at the facility. The state said Life Care did not have an adequate infection control system in place and failed to provide quality care, among other findings.

“The facility failed to ensure timely interventions for a respiratory outbreak resulting in multiple acute changes leading to hospitalization and resident deaths,” the state found.

Federal officials reported last month that Life Care had failed to notify state officials about the increasing rate of respiratory infections among residents, failed to rapidly identify and manage ill residents and failed to have a backup plan after the facility’s primary clinician fell ill. C.M.S. said that those urgent issues have since been resolved, but that Life Care would also need to demonstrate compliance on other issues, including record-keeping and its handling of safety and quality strategies.

“If L.C.C. of Kirkland does not correct all deficiencies and return to full compliance by September 16, 2020, then C.M.S. will terminate your facility from participating in the Medicare/Medicaid program,” wrote Patrick Thrift, a C.M.S. enforcement official in Seattle.

A spokesman for Life Care did not immediately return a message seeking comment. The company can appeal findings from both the federal and state reports.

Life Care emerged a month ago as an early center of the coronavirus outbreak in the United States. Two-thirds of the facility’s residents and dozens of staff members have tested positive for the coronavirus. Officials have identified 37 people linked to the facility who have died.

Life Care has said that as the crisis unfolded, managers initially had no reason to think that an outbreak of respiratory illness, common in nursing homes, was linked to the new coronavirus. That changed after testing at the end of February found that the virus was spreading in the Seattle area and in the nursing home.

Even then, Life Care has said, administrators and medical staff were left largely on their own, with little help from government officials.

The facility earned five stars out of five on its federal ratings for overall care last year. However, as part of the same rating system, the government also gave the home three stars in the category of “health inspections,” which include recent routine inspections and those prompted by complaints.

The facility had 18 citations for health inspection issues, compared with an average of 20.4 for Washington State and the nationwide average of eight. Its high overall rating in spite of that could reflect the poor standards of nursing homes in general, nursing home experts said.

People who are older or with underlying conditions are particularly vulnerable to the coronavirus. Since the Life Care outbreak began, state and federal oversight officials around the country have limited visitors and ramped up reviews at nursing homes to shield sites from infection.

Matt Richtel contributed reporting from San Francisco.

<|endoftext|>

ANNAPOLIS, Md. — Larry Hogan was annoyed. On a conference call, Mr. Hogan, the Republican governor of Maryland, had just learned that several South Korean companies were ready to ship more coronavirus test kits to his state. But they were stymied because the Food and Drug Administration had not yet approved their use.

“I don’t care if we have F.D.A. approval or not,” Mr. Hogan said into a speakerphone in the governor’s reception room, where he was flanked by a container of Purell and a 9 a.m. Diet Coke, with aides sitting six feet apart around a large table. “We’ve got people dying,” he said, adding, “I don’t want to wait for permission.”

Frustrated by limited support and unclear guidance from the Trump administration, governors across the country, including some Republicans, have been squaring off with the White House and striking out on their own to secure supplies. Mr. Hogan, in his second term in a very blue state, has tried to stay miles ahead of the virus’s incursion here, like several other governors — notably Jay Inslee of Washington and Mike DeWine of Ohio — whose responses have been given better marks from Americans than the president’s.

Mr. Hogan put his health department on alert in early January when he saw the virus’s deadly crawl through China. On Monday, he issued a stay-at-home order for residents, a few weeks after declaring a state of emergency when the first three cases emerged in Maryland last month.

He is also the head of the National Governors Association, charged with representing governors’ needs at the White House, where officials wish he would find it in his heart to say a few flattering words about Mr. Trump now and then. Instead he has bluntly demanded more aid from Washington, including more test kits and supplies and help shoring up state budgets.

“We’re still not satisfied” with the federal response to states’ needs, Mr. Hogan said this week.

Mr. Hogan has also found himself the de facto leader of the response in the Washington, D.C., metro area, where the disease has begun its exponential march. The governor of Virginia and the mayor of Washington — a city where the death rate is well above the national average — instantly followed his order this week, grounding around 15 million residents.

As of Thursday night, there have been at least 4,697 confirmed cases and 89 deaths in the three areas combined, about triple from a week ago. The two states and Washington have an unusually intrinsic relationship; they share a metro system and are home to thousands of federal workers who are central to the region’s work force and the functioning of federal government.

Mr. Hogan’s moves have major implications for the region. He has immediately hit those defiantly socializing with some of the largest fines or criminal charges in the nation. There have already been two arrests in Maryland, including of a man who hosted a bonfire party for about 60 people after the state banned large groups.

His aggressive policing is one of several reasons Mr. Hogan has slid onto center stage among governors whose states have been hammered by the coronavirus.

This week, he collaborated with a Democratic governor, Gretchen Whitmer of Michigan, on an opinion piece pleading for federal assistance — after President Trump attacked her as “that woman.” He has been a critic of the president’s overly optimistic prognostications, saying Mr. Trump’s assurances that testing problems were a thing of the past were simply not true.

For Mr. Hogan, the need to respond quickly is also personal. He is a recent cancer survivor and over 60, which puts him in a high-risk group for the virus. His preparation for this moment, he said, was seeded in the 2015 Baltimore riots, which happened 90 days into his first term.

“I knew that taking quick decisive action was better than hesitating,” he said in a (socially distant) interview in his office on Wednesday. “I think the public was not where I was on the knowledge. There were folks saying this is no big deal, it’s not as bad as the flu, it’s going to disappear. And I was saying, ‘No, it’s worse.’”

Some Democrats in Maryland have praised him for his aggressive response.

“Look, I’m a Democrat,” said Mary Pat Clarke, a city councilwoman from Baltimore. “But the governor has done an excellent job leading the state of Maryland through the Covid-19 state of our lives. He has been regular, he has been firm, he has been clear.”

With an eye on the virus’s rampage of China, Mr. Hogan convened a special session during the governors’ meeting in February. They met with top health officials, including Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, right before the governors ran to put on formal wear for a White House dinner.

“Very little was being talked about,” Mr. Hogan said. “It was sort of an eye-opener for a lot of the governors, but I think some of them still didn’t take it seriously.”

He, however, began to feel something akin to panic.

“The next day I came back to my team and said, ‘This is what I just heard, we have to get ready,’” he said. “We knew that it wasn’t going to be long before we were going to have to deal with it.”

Confused by the terms about coronavirus testing? Let us help:

Mr. Hogan has also leaned on his wife, Yumi Hogan, a Korean immigrant, who was also at the governor’s convention, which included a dinner at the Korean ambassador’s home. As the first Korean first lady in American history, Ms. Hogan has become something of an icon in South Korea. “I just grabbed my wife and said, ‘Look, you speak Korean. You know the president. You know the first lady. You know the ambassador. Let’s talk to them in Korean, and tell them we need their help.’” Several companies in South Korea immediately said they would send tests.

Mr. Hogan’s super-cop moves have not endeared him to some conservatives who largely populate the more southern and rural parts of the state.

“I think the bubble the Governor is in is missing something,” Gregory Kline, a longtime conservative activist in the state, said on Twitter. “There was no acknowledgment that his directions were doing harm to people greater than this disease would do or even that suffering is occurring not because of the disease but the executive fiat fighting it.”

Mr. Hogan is one of the few elected Republicans in the country who have publicly countered Mr. Trump’s early claims about the state of the virus, and more crucially about the amount of tests and ventilators available to states.

“I don’t think I’ve ever crossed the line and been rude or tried to attack or point fingers or place blame. But I have been willing to stand up when other people haven’t,” he said. He added, “Certainly some of my Republican colleagues probably might think I go too far. Some of the Democratic colleagues might not think I go far enough. But I’m not trying to place blame.”

Some officials said that the state could be faster in giving basic directives and that, like Mr. Hogan, they wished they could get more protective gear. “There are not enough supplies for health care workers and essential employees,” said State Senator Jill Carter, a Democrat.

Maryland has received far fewer N95 masks, respirators and gloves than it has requested from the federal government, according to documents released on Thursday by the House Committee on Oversight and Reform. And it has received none of the 100,000 swabs it requested for coronavirus test kits.

Mr. Hogan said his decisions were informed principally by health care professionals, many of them culled from the University of Maryland and Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, among other local health care providers.

“I’m not an expert on this, but I’m going to listen to the smartest guys in the room,” he said, adding: “These guys say if we don’t act now, we’re going to have this surge, we’re not going to have ventilators, we’re going to overload the system. We’re not going to have enough health care workers, we’re going to look like New York, and there’s going to be bodies stacked up.”

Every day, there are dozens of decisions to be made over conference calls. Pay some state workers extra who have been called upon to report to work when most other Marylanders are being asked to remain home? Yes. How about for workers who check on child abuse reports? Also yes. Palm Sunday services permitted in church parking lots? Yes, but no passing of a collection plate. This debate went on for some time. “We don’t like government telling churches what to do,” Mr. Hogan said, “but we don’t want 2 million people to die.”

<|endoftext|>

Samuel Roy Quinn spent five hours with his mother on Friday, finally allowed to say goodbye as her condition deteriorated in a nursing home south of Houston. He held her hand and hugged her. He removed his face mask several times to kiss her on the forehead.

When he eventually left the nursing home, The Resort at Texas City, an employee ran after Mr. Quinn to tell him — for the first time — that his mother had tested positive for the coronavirus, he said.

It turned out that Mr. Quinn’s mother, Peggy Smith, was one of 83 residents and employees at the 135-bed facility who tested positive for the virus, according to local health officials. Some residents are still waiting for results.

Mr. Quinn said his 87-year-old mother, who had Alzheimer’s disease, died on Saturday morning.

“I would have not stayed there that long if I knew she had coronavirus,” Mr. Quinn, a fence builder, said from his home in the nearby town of San Leon, where he is now grieving in self-quarantine.

Health officials in Texas are racing to place new restrictions on some nursing homes after 150 residents and employees of two facilities alone fell ill with the coronavirus. In addition to the Texas City facility, the virus also sickened 67 of the 84 residents at a San Antonio nursing home, killing one.

Dr. Philip Keiser, the top health official in Galveston County, where Mr. Quinn’s mother fell ill, planned to prohibit staff members from working at multiple nursing homes if they work at a facility where a resident has tested positive. The order would also require nursing homes to alert family members if their loved one has been confirmed to have the virus.

Nursing home residents are among the most vulnerable hosts for the coronavirus, as evidenced by the horror at a nursing home near Seattle where 37 people linked to the facility have died.

Mr. Quinn said he had asked the nursing staff to take his mother’s temperature on Friday while he was there and that she had not had a fever. That made him feel relieved, even though Ms. Smith was having trouble breathing, which Mr. Quinn knew was a symptom.

Moments after Mr. Quinn left the facility, though, a man rushed out and stopped him 10 feet from his truck to tell him that his mother’s coronavirus test had come back positive, Mr. Quinn said. The facility's staff members had not warned him that his mother may have the virus, Mr. Quinn said, adding that it was even more frustrating because the nursing home had not let him or his family visit until it appeared she was near her death.

“We weren’t able to see her in final days, but she gets it anyway,” Mr. Quinn said. “And then they let me go in there without telling me.”

A woman who answered the phone at the facility on Saturday said the nursing home did not immediately have a comment.

Both the San Antonio and Texas City nursing homes have been cited by state inspectors in the past for health violations. Among the problems found at The Resort at Texas City was a failure, in 2017, to put an infection control program in place for several residents. The facility corrected the violations a month later, according to state records.

Elsewhere in Texas, at least 50 residents and 25 staff members have tested positive for the virus at the Denton State Supported Living Center, a large facility north of the Dallas-Fort Worth metro area for people with intellectual or developmental disabilities, according to Denton County health officials.

Of the 6,112 people in Texas who have tested positive for the virus, at least 109 have died, as of Saturday afternoon.

<|endoftext|>

PHILADELPHIA — At Sunday family dinners, the grandchildren would beg to hear that story again, the one about her twins in the baby carriage, and one of them was dead, and what did she do. This was when Sarah Jane Anderson would add to the collective memory of a Philadelphia nightmare.

Well, children …

It was October 1918, and the raging flu epidemic had killed 18-month-old Augusta, but spared her twin, Eleanor. Funeral parlors could not meet the demands of the dead; caskets were stacked on the sidewalks. But Ms. Anderson had a plan: She knew an undertaker in northeast Philadelphia.

She tucked the twins — one alive, one dead — in a baby carriage, left their rowhouse in Camden, N.J., and took the Delaware River ferry to Philadelphia. As she wheeled her sorrow north, fearful that she might be arrested for moving a body across state lines, people kept peeking into the carriage to admire how peacefully the toddlers were sleeping.

Twins? Aren’t they cute?

Six miles later, Ms. Anderson reached the undertaker; he accepted the tiny body. She then retraced her steps with little Eleanor, who grew up to become the mother of Janice Williams, who heard her grandmother tell this story long ago, and now — in the midst of another pandemic — feels compelled to share it.

“She walked home,” marveled Ms. Williams, 84.

The United States was crippled by the brutal flu that swept through the country in the midst of the First World War, but nowhere was hit more forcefully than the powerhouse industrial cities of Pennsylvania, the nation’s primary manufacturing hub for ships and steel needed in the war effort. More than 17,500 Philadelphians died of the flu in the first six months; 4,500 in one week; 837 in a single day, Oct. 12.

Much from that time has the sudden ring of familiarity: the shattering consequence of holding a large public event — a patriotic parade featuring marching bands, Boy Scouts and troops before cheering crowds packed 15 feet deep on the sidewalks — in defiance of scientific advice to stay at home. The overwhelmed health care workers and morticians, and the many citizens who rose to the moment. The fight against an invisible foe whose capriciousness meant that a child died but her twin lived.

Philadelphia has not sidestepped the 2020 coronavirus. Cases reached 2,430 by the end of the week; hundreds more are added every day and 26 people have died.

But the city may not be as overwhelmed as some others. The public health commissioner sprang into action soon after word emerged of the virus in China, holding meetings with hospital administrators as early as January. Testing equipment was purchased early, and Temple University offered space for additional hospital beds. The city expects to have sufficient beds to withstand even a worst-case scenario, though it is scrambling to secure the needed equipment, including ventilators.

Dr. Tony S. Reed, chief medical officer at Temple University Hospital, said that Philadelphia’s ordeal in 1918 — enduring the second-highest death rate in the country, next to Pittsburgh — has informed its response to the current epidemic. “The state has handled it very differently, and the city handled it radically differently,” he said. “Frankly, for us it’s going to make all the difference in the world.”

Nancy Bader Thomas, a retired bond underwriter, said she had thought often in recent days of the similarities between the now she is living and the then that both her parents experienced in 1918 Philadelphia.

“It happened again. We’re reliving it,” Ms. Bader Thomas said. “History can repeat itself.”

Stirred by the onset of Covid-19, the Philadelphia memories of 1918 have helped, but they also haunt.

The initial wave of the flu arrived in Philadelphia aboard a British merchant ship that docked at the city’s Navy Yard. Within days, 600 sailors fell ill.

Philadelphia’s health director, a gynecologist named Dr. Wilmer Krusen, initially denied that the city had a flu problem, hoping that isolating the sick would limit the outbreak. He faced a difficult decision: shut down the city, or hope that quarantines would suffice.

But the United States was also embroiled in a world war. Philadelphia felt intense pressure to recruit soldiers, churn out warships — and demonstrate its second-to-none patriotism with an elaborate parade to boost morale and encourage the purchase of war-financing bonds.

“If Krusen had decided not to go ahead with the parade, knowing that all cities were doing it, they would have sacked him,” said Robert Hicks, a historian who created a 1918 flu exhibit for the Mütter Museum of the College of Physicians of Philadelphia. “There’s no way it could have been stopped.”

On Sept. 28, an estimated 200,000 people — about one-ninth of the city’s population — packed downtown for the rousing procession of floats and troops. War widows held court on street corners. Schoolgirls in white marched arm in arm. Citizens bought bonds.

And a virus spread.

Two days later, Dr. Krusen acknowledged that the city was in the throes of an epidemic — but it was too late: Philadelphia did not have a chance. Hundreds of police officers came down with a “blue flu,” impeding law enforcement. Telephone switchboard operators fell ill, disrupting communication. Schools and public venues closed, funeral processions competed for street space and church bells tolled incessantly for the dead.

But many Philadelphians responded as if to the war posters festooning the city: They did their part.

A citizens committee redirected its efforts from fighting the war to fighting the flu, partitioning the city and assigning medical professionals to each section. Families sheltered orphans; a private school, Girard College, received a class of orphaned “flu kids.” Volunteers dug mass graves.

Then the epidemic was over, as suddenly as it had arrived. While other major cities experienced multiple harsh waves of the flu, Philadelphia was for the most part hit with blunt force only once. Soldiers traumatized by war returned to families traumatized by an epidemic. But Philadelphia moved on.

Now, in the spring of 2020, another epidemic has hit, and this city of 1.5 million, like many other communities, is bursting with absence. No packs of commuters erupting from 30th Street Station. No tourists swarming about Independence Hall. No fans streaming into the Wells Fargo Center to see 76ers basketball or Flyers hockey.

Girard College is closed for the epidemic. The Navy Yard, now an industrial park, is mostly deserted but has a coronavirus testing site. And few people linger at the corner of Broad and Chestnut, where many thousands once gathered for a glorious and deadly parade.

Although historical markers throughout the city commemorate assorted people, places and moments — America’s first Bible society; Girl Scout cookies; the singer Mario Lanza — there is no public marker memorializing the 1918 epidemic. Too painful, perhaps. Best forgotten.

But there has been that exhibit at the Mütter Museum. Even before it opened in October, the exhibit, “Spit Spreads Death: The Influenza Pandemic of 1918-19 in Philadelphia,” was generating calls and emails from people who had stories to tell.

“They do not talk about the experiences in a detached, retrospective way,” Mr. Hicks, the museum’s former director, said. “They talk about really desperate times and anguish. It’s not just, ‘Oh, my great-grandfather died from the flu.’ It’s something intimate and personal, as if the person telling us the story witnessed the event themselves.”

Nancy Hill, the museum’s manager, agreed. She noted that since the city’s effective shutdown last month because of the coronavirus, there has been a spike in emails to the museum from people with epidemic stories to share.

People like Ms. Williams, who remembers those Sunday dinners of the 1940s, when she and other children would swarm around their plump grandmother Sarah Jane Anderson, who had had a hard life and who loved to play Chinese checkers, begging her to tell the story again.

It always began with: The baby was very sick, and the baby died.

As if her grief were stipulated.

The baby’s twin, Eleanor, lived to be 83. She married, volunteered at a hospital thrift shop, remained loyal to the Phillies — and, according to her daughter, often wondered how life might have been had her twin survived.

The baby-carriage story inherited by Ms. Williams is just one moment among so many that unfolded almost simultaneously throughout Philadelphia, where children on the street could be heard reciting variations of a new ditty:

I had a little bird,

Its name was Enza.

I opened the window,

And in flew Enza.

When even loosely assembled, these moments provide a cinematic narrative of terror, mourning and resilience that resounds today.

It resounds like the bells of the churches in the Grays Ferry neighborhood, where 9-year-old Isabel Gallagher would walk past coffins stacked outside St. Gabriel’s Roman Catholic Church. Then, at home, her father would prescribe hot toddies of whiskey, hot water and sugar.

Isabel lived to be 91, her daughter, Barbara Selletti, said. “And until the day she died, she believed that what saved her were the hot toddies.”

In South Philadelphia, nothing could save Amilia Coia, 26, a wife and mother with lustrous long black hair, from the insidious flu. Her 7-year-old son, John Angelo Coia, also developed the flu, and the sips of whiskey and the pouch of garlic tied around his neck had no effect. At some point, a Roman Catholic priest loomed over him to administer last rites.

But the child recovered. He grew up, married, worked for 46 years as a printer for The Philadelphia Inquirer, and died at 83. In his retirement, he would sip a coffee or beer with his son Anthony and summon those dark days — recalling the friends who were missing when fresh air returned to the streets.

“He would go out to play,” recalled Anthony Coia, 73, “and little Billy wouldn’t be there.”

Ms. Bader Thomas, the retired bond underwriter, is the custodian of the influenza stories passed on by her parents, both of whom grew up around the West Kensington neighborhood.

Her mother, Irene, would tell the cautionary tale of a neighbor, a big, strong German in his 40s, who drove a six-horse wagon loaded with beer barrels. “He was in superior shape to be able to do that kind of work,” said Ms. Bader Thomas, 77. “And he was gone within a couple of days.”

This was one reason Irene’s grandmother, an Austrian immigrant named Bertha, kept all her family members isolated in the house — and they all survived. Irene, in fact, lived to be 104.

Ms. Bader Thomas’s father, Walter, was 17 when he got hired to do a job few wanted: collect the dead by horse and wagon.

“They had to work fast,” she recalled her father saying. “They just threw them in the ground, blankets wrapped around them.”

He and other morgue workers drank whiskey to protect themselves from the flu and, maybe, the memories. But when those memories returned in later years, Ms. Bader Thomas said, her father would be matter-of-fact about even the horrific details, such as burying several babies in a barrel so as to be more efficient.

“It was just: This is what happened,” she said.

“You just go forward,” said Ms. Bader Thomas, self-isolating in her home in a Philadelphia suburb. “You never look back.”

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — Attorney General William P. Barr ordered the Bureau of Prisons on Friday to expand the group of federal inmates eligible for early release and to prioritize those at three facilities where known coronavirus cases have grown precipitously, as the virus threatens to overwhelm prison medical facilities and nearby hospitals.

Mr. Barr wrote in a memo to Michael Carvajal, the director of the Bureau of Prisons, that he was intensifying the push to release prisoners to home confinement because “emergency conditions” created by the coronavirus have affected the ability of the bureau to function.

He directed the bureau to prioritize the release of prisoners from federal correctional institutions in Louisiana, Connecticut and Ohio, which comprise the bulk of the system’s 91 inmates and 50 staff members who have tested positive for the coronavirus.

At least five inmates have died at the federal prison in Oakdale, La., and two have died at the federal prison near Elkton, Ohio. Officials with unions that represent prison workers have said that the reported numbers are likely undercounting the number of infected staff, given the paucity of testing.

“We are experiencing significant levels of infection at several of our facilities,” Mr. Barr said in the memo. He said that where appropriate the bureau must quickly “move vulnerable inmates out of these institutions.”

The memo was first reported by Politico.

Last week, Mr. Barr asked the bureau to identify and release all inmates who were eligible for home confinement, no longer posed a threat to the public and were particularly vulnerable to the coronavirus.

After that directive, 522 of the system’s 146,000 total inmates were moved to home confinement, according to the Bureau of Prisons.

On Friday, Mr. Barr expanded that cohort of people eligible for release to home confinement, exercising an authority granted to him by the $2 trillion economic stabilization package that President Trump signed into law last week.

That expanded group includes “all at-risk inmates — not only those who were previously eligible for transfer,” Mr. Barr wrote in his memo.

Citing a lack of resources, he also authorized the bureau to release inmates to home confinement without electronic monitors, where appropriate.

The coronavirus has ripped through jails and prisons, where it is impossible for guards and inmates to maintain social distancing.

In an attempt to slow the spread of the virus, authorities nationwide have released thousands of inmates, primarily from state and local facilities, where the vast majority of all incarcerated people reside.

This week, the bureau said that all 122 facilities in the federal prison system would be on lockdown for two weeks to slow the spread.

On Monday, Representative Jerrold Nadler, Democrat of New York and the chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, urged Mr. Barr to “institute aggressive measures to release medically compromised, elderly and pregnant prisoners” in order to stem the health crisis in the federal prison system.

Mr. Nadler also asked that the Justice Department begin universal coronavirus testing in all federal prison facilities.

But law enforcement agents have pushed back on early release more broadly, arguing that doing so could overwhelm law enforcement, particularly probation and pretrial services officers.

Once an inmate leaves prison, probation and pretrial services officers “supervise those formerly incarcerated individuals and ensure they no longer pose a threat to the American people,” Larry Cosme, the national president of the Federal Law Enforcement Officers Association, said in a statement on Monday.

“It is imperative that law enforcement has the personnel, protective equipment, and appropriate compensation needed to carry out their important duties,” Mr. Cosme said.

In his memo, Mr. Barr said that prisoners who had committed serious criminal acts like violent crimes or sex offenses would not be released in order to protect public safety. And he noted that the release of prisoners comes at a time when police forces across the country are shrinking as officers are exposed to the coronavirus.

“The last thing our massively overburdened police forces need right now is the indiscriminate release of thousands of prisoners onto the streets without any verification that those prisoners will follow the laws when they are released,” Mr. Barr wrote in his memo.

<|endoftext|>

For another time on Wednesday, President Trump somberly described a personal connection to the coronavirus as he discussed the effects of the pandemic at his daily briefing with his virus task force.

Sometimes he has referred to a friend who has the coronavirus and other times to friends. His aides have repeatedly declined to identify whom the president has been talking about.

But three people familiar with the matter said he was describing Stanley Chera, a New York City real-estate developer who has known the president for many years and had decamped to Deal, N.J., a few weeks ago as the coronavirus spread.

But it was unclear whom else Mr. Trump might have been referring to when he said he has other friends who are also ill.

Mr. Chera, 78, became sick at some point in Deal, and was rushed to NewYork-Presbyterian/Columbia hospital, according to two of Mr. Chera’s friends. Two of those friends said Mr. Chera was in a medically induced coma.

But it is unclear whether he has tested positive for the coronavirus. One of the friends said his condition had been described as viral pneumonia.

Mr. Chera’s assistant did not respond to a message seeking comment. A White House spokeswoman declined to comment.

Mr. Trump described a friend being stricken by the “viciousness” of the coronavirus and falling into a coma in remarks on Sunday, the first time he mentioned someone he knew becoming sick with the virus. Then, on Monday, he said more than one friend had been affected.

“You see the numbers. You see the numbers like I see the numbers. I have some friends that are unbelievably sick,” Mr. Trump told reporters in the Rose Garden, leaving the impression that those friends had weighed on him as he made the decision to extend the guidelines for social distancing through April 30.

“We thought they were going in for a mild stay, and in one case, he’s unconscious, in a coma,” the president continued. “And you say, how did that happen?”

On Tuesday, the description was equally grim in the case of one friend whom he did not name but described.

“When you send a friend to the hospital, and you call up to find out how is he doing — it happened to me, where he goes to the hospital, he says goodbye,” Mr. Trump said.

“He’s sort of a tough guy. A little older, a little heavier than he’d like to be, frankly. And you call up the next day: ‘How’s he doing?’ And he’s in a coma? This is not the flu,” the president intoned.

Asked at Wednesday’s briefing if that friend’s illness had been a turning point in his understanding of the severity of the crisis, Mr. Trump replied: “Not a turning point. No, before that, I knew.”

But he added: “It hit him very hard. He is strong. A very strong kind of a guy. He is older. He is heavier. He sort of is central casting for what we’re talking about, and it hit him very hard.”

Mr. Trump has a history of mentioning the comments or experience of unnamed friends. And it has not been clear whether they all exist.

For instance, he has often talked about a friend named “Jim” who used to love visiting Paris, according to Mr. Trump, until it became a haven for extremists. The president has never said who “Jim” is, and aides have declined to give a last name.

But Mr. Chera is an old friend of Mr. Trump’s, as well as a donor to his re-election effort whom the president has acknowledged at fund-raising events in the past. Mr. Chera also partnered in the past with the company owned by the president’s son-in-law, Jared Kushner, for retail space at 666 Fifth Avenue in Manhattan.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — One of the hallmarks of the United States military is its ability to project power around the world, often under the banner of slogans intended to strike fear in its adversaries. “Ready to fight tonight” for U.S. troops in South Korea; “America’s 911” for the Marine Corps expeditionary units at sea; the list goes on.

But now the foe is a novel coronavirus, and it has struck deep. More than 1,200 military personnel and their family members are affected, disabling a talisman of American military might — a nuclear-powered aircraft carrier — and leaving the Defense Department virtually at war with itself over two competing instincts: protecting troops from the virus and continuing its decades-old mission of patrolling the globe and engaging in combat, if ordered to do so.

The Navy is thus far refusing to completely evacuate an aircraft carrier where 93 service members have been confirmed to be infected with the coronavirus. Defense Secretary Mark T. Esper has put himself on the side of business as usual in maintaining readiness while also saying that force protection is a top priority. President Trump, for his part, threatened a familiar foe, tweeting on Wednesday that Iran would “pay a very heavy price” if its proxies attacked American troops or assets in Iraq. Other Defense Department officials continued to insist that the aircraft carrier, the Theodore Roosevelt, remain ready to carry out its missions.

The commander of the Roosevelt, Capt. Brett E. Crozier, pointed out in a strongly worded letter that “we are not at war.” That statement raised questions from the Pacific to the Pentagon of what was so important about the aircraft carrier’s presence off the coast of Guam that the Defense Department could not evacuate the ship and do a deep cleaning, as suggested by Captain Crozier.

“Militaries are made to move, but that runs counter to the imperative for everyone to stay in place,” said Derek Chollet, a former assistant secretary of defense. “Just as the Covid-19 threat becomes a priority, it does not mean that other threats disappear or enemies stand down.”

U.S. warships typically spend months at sea monitoring the activities of adversaries. The ships assigned to the Pacific Fleet patrol the South China Sea, the East China Sea and areas in between, sometimes undertaking so-called freedom of navigation operations that bring them close to disputed islands in the area. The goal of these voyages is to drive home to China that the United States does not recognize Beijing’s claims of ownership.

American warships in the region are also keeping an eye on the nuclear and missile threat from North Korea. And they sit ready to deploy to the Arabian Sea and the Persian Gulf if tensions — with, say, Iran — flare up.

But for the moment, the virus has proved far more damaging than any recent encounters with traditional adversaries and exposed a vulnerability of a force often referred to as the world’s policeman. For all the focus on the battles in Afghanistan, Iraq, Syria, Yemen and the power conflict with China and Russia, none has come close to crippling an American aircraft carrier in days.

“Without healthy sailors there is no mission readiness, so the health of the crew has to come first,” said James G. Stavridis, a retired admiral and former NATO commander. But, he added, the Navy cannot simply bring the carrier to port and send everyone off the ship: “It is full of weapons, billions of dollars of equipment, fire hazards and nuclear reactors.”

As of Wednesday, about 1,000 of the approximately 4,800 crew members had been taken off the Roosevelt, a number that was expected to more than double in the coming days.

Adm. Michael M. Gilday, the chief of naval operations, said on Wednesday that the Navy would have to maintain a core crew of about 1,000 to monitor the nuclear reactors, guard the warplanes and weapons and keep the ship running.

But that could take the carrier out of action for weeks or even months.

“It won’t be resolved in the next couple of days,” Thomas B. Modly, the acting Navy secretary, told reporters on Wednesday alongside Admiral Gilday. “It will take some time.”

One question now is whether the Navy will surge more ships to the Pacific to make up for the carrier hunkering down in port off Guam.

The Roosevelt is one of the Navy’s 11 aircraft carriers. But only a third of the enormous ships and their air wings is deployed at any given time; one third is preparing for sea tours that last six to eight months, and the last third is undergoing maintenance after completing deployments.

There are currently four carriers deployed. The Eisenhower and the Truman are in the Persian Gulf, a sign of American resolve amid increasing tensions with Iran and its Shiite proxies in Iraq, which have carried out deadly rocket attacks against American troops in Iraq.

Joining the Roosevelt in the western Pacific is the Ronald Reagan, which is based out of Yokosuka, Japan.

For the military, the core issue is that as the virus spreads, it becomes increasingly difficult to carry on with training and missions. At U.S. military outposts all over the world, commanders are stopping training alongside local forces and instituting other measures to seal off their troops from the threat. Even so, the moves are ultimately half measures as the military, especially those who are deployed, live in shared spaces.

That problem is only amplified in the Navy. Each ship — with confined berthing areas, mess halls, shared bathrooms and nowhere to go — is a cramped cell where social distancing is nearly impossible.

“Once the virus is on a ship like that, it’s going to spread,” Mr. Modly said. He added that of the approximately 90 ships that were currently deployed, the Roosevelt was the only one currently contending with the virus. Discussions were underway about whether more adjustments to operations might be needed in the future, he said.

Current and former Navy officials offered conflicting assessments of how their leadership had handled the unfolding crisis aboard the Roosevelt. Some noted that the carrier promptly pulled into port to enable a wider testing program and a safer mechanism to transfer infected sailors off the ship.

“The system of risk assessment inherent in military operations is functioning as designed,” said Adm. Scott H. Swift, a former Pacific Fleet commander. “The challenges we all face is the scope and scale of the impact of the virus.”

But others warned that the response was falling short, and that it threatened the combat readiness of many Navy warships.

“Think Diamond Princess by a factor of 10,” said Sean O’Keefe, a former secretary of the Navy, referring to the commercial cruise liner on which hundreds of passengers were stricken. “There’s no way to effectively segregate large numbers of crew members before the virus moves through the entire ship. It doesn’t take an active imagination to realize the U.S. Navy’s deployed fleet could be immobilized in six weeks if the naval service can’t come up with an effective containment strategy.”

Other commanders expressed fears that adversaries could see the stricken carrier as an opportunity to harm the United States or American interests at a time when the Pentagon and the Trump administration are consumed with fighting the coronavirus.

“My concern is the signal the Chinese, the North Koreans or the Russians pick up from this, and see it as an opportunity for misadventure,” said Vice Adm. William Douglas Crowder, a retired commander of the Seventh Fleet and a former deputy chief of naval operations. “They miscalculate our ability to respond.”

Other branches of the military are having issues as well. “It’s having an impact on readiness,” Gen. David L. Goldfein, the Air Force chief of staff, acknowledged in a conference call with reporters on Wednesday.

Air Force warplanes are flying fewer missions and conducting less training, operating with split shifts and split crews to limit the exposure of personnel to the virus. The Air Force’s nuclear mission was not affected, said Brig. Gen. Edward W. Thomas Jr., the service’s top spokesman. Missile crews were split up, isolated and protected, he said, and each one was working.

“If any adversary believed that our defenses were weakened,” General Thomas said, “it would be a serious miscalculation.”

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — For weeks, President Trump and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo forcefully used the controversial terms “Chinese virus” and “Wuhan virus” in public and said they intended to hold Beijing responsible for the crippling coronavirus pandemic.

Now, they have avoided using those phrases, and the administration is welcoming planeloads of medical equipment from China. On Wednesday, Mr. Trump was effusive in describing his relationship with President Xi Jinping of China, whom he spoke with last week.

“The relationship with China is a good one, and my relationship with him is really good,” Mr. Trump told reporters. The president added that he “will always assume the best” of China’s leaders. Asked whether American intelligence agencies have assessed that China falsified case and fatality numbers over the virus, Mr. Trump said, “I’m not an accountant from China.”

As the pandemic spreads, relations between the United States and China have whipsawed wildly. Washington and Beijing were at each other’s throats for weeks over the outbreak, which began in Wuhan, China, and was initially covered up by Communist Party officials.

But in recent days, the two sides have settled on a tentative, uneasy truce. They have agreed to hold fire on public sniping over the virus and to look for ways to cooperate to slow the contagion.

Some American officials had recognized that the deteriorating state of relations — at the worst point since the Tiananmen Square massacre in 1989 — was impeding global efforts to fight the pandemic. Several of Mr. Trump’s aides quietly reached out to Chinese officials through American businessmen with extensive ties in China, according to people familiar with the efforts.

National security officials and China hawks in the State Department are skeptical the détente will last, but several top advisers to Mr. Trump have advocated restraint — notably Jared Kushner, Mr. Trump’s son-in-law; Steven Mnuchin, the Treasury secretary; and Larry Kudlow, the director of the National Economic Council.

They argue that the two superpowers need to work together to suppress the virus and resuscitate the global economy, and that Mr. Trump should not jeopardize a trade deal that the two nations reached last December.

Mr. Kushner worked with Chinese officials to arrange a series of shipments of purchased protective gear for medical workers, the first of which arrived in New York on Sunday. The partnership between the government and several of the nation’s largest health care distributors is expected to funnel much-needed masks, gowns and protective gear to hospitals in the coming weeks.

Chinese officials are trumpeting the truce while denouncing Mr. Pompeo, Peter Navarro, a hawkish trade adviser, and other American officials who have continued to criticize China this week, even if their barbs have been more muted. Representatives of the Chinese Foreign Ministry this week have referred constantly to the telephone call between Mr. Trump and Mr. Xi in news conferences in Beijing.

“The two heads of state agreed that under current circumstances, China and the U.S. should stand united and fight Covid-19,” Hua Chunying, a spokeswoman for the Chinese Foreign Ministry, said Tuesday, referring to the disease caused by the virus.

She noted that Ma Xiaowei, the minister of China’s National Health Commission, spoke on Monday with Alex M. Azar II, the U.S. secretary of health and human services, “to exchange ideas on the two countries’ pandemic prevention and control efforts.”

The truce is limited to actions related to the virus and does not extend to other parts of the increasingly tense relationship between the United States and China. American officials who have long advocated an aggressive stand toward China are still intent on pushing back against Beijing on many fronts, including technology, espionage and military expansionism in Asia.

In a cabinet-level meeting last week, administration officials approved a draft rule that would extend export control restrictions to foreign companies that use American technology, a measure aimed at choking off supplies to Huawei, the Chinese technology company. The move still needs Mr. Trump’s approval.

And last Thursday, Mr. Trump signed into law an act that requires the United States to lend stronger diplomatic support to Taiwan, the self-governing democratic island claimed by China. A Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman, Geng Shuang, said the United States should “correct its mistakes” or “inevitably encounter a resolute strike back by China.”

American intelligence officials also assess that as the Chinese government retreats from its overt anti-American messages involving the virus, it is likely to continue to push those online by covert means.

But asked about it on Monday on Fox News, Mr. Trump dismissed that official assessment of China’s disinformation campaign. “They do it and we do it and we call them different things,” he said. He added that “every country does it” before denouncing The New York Times and The Washington Post, which had written about the anti-American disinformation campaigns, as “dishonest” and “corrupt.”

American and Chinese officials appear to realize that finding common ground on the virus could help save lives. Nations have been receiving shipments of medical gear from China, though some of the test kits for the virus have turned out to be faulty. In Italy, Chinese experts have advised officials on how to carry out strict lockdowns.

“Actually this is smart,” said Orville Schell, the director of the Center on U.S.-China Relations at the Asia Society. “Isn’t that the only way to do it? You cooperate where you share interests and you compete and criticize where you don’t. We did it with the Russians in the Soviet days and got some things done.”

Mr. Trump’s earlier attacks on China originated in part with national security officials who aim to hold the Communist Party accountable for the outbreak, and in part from the president’s deep frustration that the pandemic was sinking the American economy, which he saw as key to his re-election.

Mr. Trump has sought to deflect widespread criticism that his administration’s failures had led to the spread of the virus across the United States. And from his campaign in 2016 and the recent trade war, Mr. Trump knows that being tough on China appeals to his supporters, some of his political advisers said.

Meanwhile, Mr. Mnuchin and Mr. Kudlow, who typically counsel the president to try to work more closely with Beijing, had been preoccupied with the crash in the stock markets and a looming recession.

In mid-March, Mr. Mnuchin and Mr. Kudlow were working long hours shepherding an enormous stimulus bill through Congress. In their absence, more hawkish aides, including Mr. Pompeo, Mr. Navarro and Robert C. O’Brien, the national security adviser, had the president’s ear.

With the congressional bill signed on Friday, Mr. Mnuchin and Mr. Kudlow have returned to the president’s side and joined Mr. Kushner in pressing for a softer approach on China.

And Mr. Trump has gradually come to grips with the foundering economy, deciding he can instead run for re-election on being the man to steer the United States through a crisis, a person familiar with his political strategy said.

A recent bump in the president’s approval ratings has bolstered that sentiment.

For American officials, another turning point came on March 22, when Cui Tiankai, the Chinese ambassador to the United States, said in an interview with “Axios on HBO” that the theory that the virus had originated with the United States military was “crazy.” The assertion, which had been promoted on Twitter on March 12 by Zhao Lijian, a Foreign Ministry spokesman, had infuriated American officials. For their part, Chinese officials have been incensed by insinuations made by American politicians, including Senator Tom Cotton, Republican of Arkansas, that the virus might have originated in a Chinese laboratory.

The call last Thursday between Mr. Trump and Mr. Xi was the first high-level interaction between the two governments in many weeks.

American and Chinese officials say they are continuing to enforce the terms of the initial trade deal they signed in January — though analysts have expressed doubts about the potential for U.S.-China trade to proceed entirely undisrupted, given the cratering economy in both nations.

If China fails to meet its commitment under the deal to buy an additional $200 billion of products by 2021, trade tensions could erupt again.

This week, Mr. Pompeo, the administration’s most vocal China hawk, adopted a more restrained tone and dropped his use of “Wuhan virus.” 

Mr. Pompeo still has taken a few swipes at China, though. In a call on Monday with Jens Stoltenberg, the secretary general of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Mr. Pompeo discussed the need to counter attempts by China and Russia to “spread disinformation and propaganda related to the virus,” according to a State Department statement. And in a Monday conference call with news organizations based in Asia, Mr. Pompeo said it was a “bad thing” that China had just expelled almost all American journalists for three major U.S. newspapers, including The Times.

“I must say this is typical Pompeo in his ‘lying’ and ‘cheating’ style,” Ms. Hua said Wednesday, “but these comments are completely inconsistent with what President Trump said last week during his phone call with President Xi.”

Michael Crowley contributed reporting.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — President Trump said on Friday that the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention was urging all Americans to wear a mask when they leave their homes, but he immediately undercut the message by repeatedly calling the recommendation voluntary and promising that he would not wear one himself.

“With the masks, it is going to be really a voluntary thing,” the president said at the beginning of the daily coronavirus briefing at the White House. “You can do it. You don’t have to do it. I am choosing not to do it. But some people may want to do it, and that’s OK. It may be good. Probably will — they’re making a recommendation. It’s only a recommendation, it’s voluntary.”

“Wearing a face mask as I greet presidents, prime ministers, dictators, kings, queens — I don’t know,” he added. “Somehow, I don’t see it for myself.”

Mr. Trump’s announcement, followed by his quick dismissal, was a remarkable public display of the intense debate that has played out inside the West Wing over the past several days as a divided administration argued about whether to request such a drastic change in Americans’ social behavior.

Dr. Steven Choi, the chief quality officer and associate dean at Yale New Haven Health System and Yale University School of Medicine, said the president’s behavior at the briefing contributed to confusion among health care workers and regular Americans.

“For anyone, particularly the president of the United States, to ignore recommendations from the C.D.C. is not only irresponsible but selfish,” Dr. Choi said.

The president’s remarks came during a particularly contentious briefing where Mr. Trump insulted reporters, jousted with members of his own administration and returned to pugilistic form after several days in which he appeared to grasp the grim implications of a virus that could kill hundreds of thousands of Americans.

Mr. Trump again dismissed the recommendation of Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, for a national stay-at-home order, saying he would leave such demands to the governors. But he did say that the federal government would pay hospitals to treat coronavirus patients, instead of allowing people to buy heavily subsidized insurance on the Affordable Care Act’s insurance exchanges, as many Democrats have urged.

The mask debate has played out in public and in private. Mr. Trump said Americans who choose to comply with the C.D.C.’s recommendation should use a basic cloth or face mask, not medical- or surgical-grade masks that are used by hospital workers and emergency workers. He also said people must still follow social distancing guidelines, which he called the “safest way to avoid the infection.”

Senior officials at the C.D.C. have been pushing the president for days to advise everyone — even people who appear to be healthy — to wear a mask or a scarf that covers their mouth and nose when shopping at the grocery store or while in other public places.

The embrace of such a policy would be one of the most visible alterations to social habits in the United States in the face of a pandemic that has infected more than a million people around the globe and killed nearly 60,000 — a physical manifestation of fear that has gripped millions of Americans.

The issue became more urgent after the C.D.C.’s director, Dr. Robert R. Redfield, said that as many as a quarter of those already infected may show no symptoms but still contribute to “significant” transmission. Local officials in New York and Los Angeles have already called for people to cover their faces in public. On Friday, the governor of Pennsylvania called on his state’s residents to wear masks when they go out.

The surgeon general, Jerome M. Adams, stood next to the president Friday and urged Americans to comply.

“The virus can spread between people interacting in close proximity, for example coughing, speaking or sneezing, even if those people were not exhibiting symptoms,” Dr. Adams said. “In light of this new evidence, the C.D.C. recommends and the task force recommends wearing cloth face coverings in public settings where other social distancing measures are difficult.”

But some White House officials have resisted and Mr. Trump on Friday time and again said it was voluntary.

Matthew Pottinger, the deputy national security adviser, who has been wearing a mask during meetings in the White House, has shown people studies that advocate the wide use of masks, one official said. Other officials believed that was excessive.

One top C.D.C. official who has seen emails from people in the West Wing said that some of Mr. Trump’s advisers were pressing him to recommend mask wearing only in “areas of widespread transmission.” That worried C.D.C. officials because the virus has already spread, largely undetected to most parts of the country. Wearing masks or other face coverings everywhere, including in places where there are few reported cases, will help slow the rate of infection, they believe.

The result was been a policy stalemate that played out on live television.

Dr. Deborah L. Birx, the coordinator of the White House coronavirus response, expressed serious reservations on Thursday, saying that asking all Americans to wear masks could inadvertently signal that Americans can abandon social distancing and return to public life as long as they wear a mask.

“We don’t want people to feel like, ‘Oh, I’m wearing a mask. I’m protected and I’m protecting others,’” Dr. Birx said at the daily briefing. Others at the White House have expressed worry that asking all Americans to wear masks could heighten shortages for doctors, nurses and emergency workers, even if they urge people not to seek the highly protective, and scarce, N95 masks used by hospital staff.

Dr. Fauci said in an interview on CNN this week that “you don’t want to take masks away from the health care providers who are in a real and present danger of getting infected.”

Hospitals across the country are running out of N95 masks, which filter at least 95 percent of particles that are 0.3 microns or larger. In a move to increase the availability of the masks, the Food and Drug Administration said Friday it would allow use of a Chinese equivalent.

Skeptics inside the administration also raised doubts about whether people in the United States would ever feel comfortable wearing masks in public, noting that the cultural norms are different in America from some Asian countries, where the use of masks became more common after previous outbreaks.

Some conservatives have said they did not believe that Americans would ever accept wide usage. Michael Dougherty, a conservative writer at National Review, wrote that Americans would “quickly feel that masks are ridiculous, menacing, or an imposition on life, then conclude they must be temporary.”

Mr. Trump’s personal hesitance also underscored questions about whether other politicians or media personalities would choose to wear masks while appearing in public.

Outside of the White House, the move toward masks accelerated quickly this week. On Friday, after Gov. Tom Wolf of Pennsylvania, a Democrat, urged residents of his state to wear masks if they ventured out of their homes, the state’s health secretary reiterated that staying at home — away from groups of people — remained the most effective way to ensure that the virus would not spread.

“A mask isn’t a pass to go back to work, or go visit friends, or go socialize,” said the health secretary, Dr. Rachel Levine.

At the World Health Organization briefing on Friday, Dr. Michael J. Ryan, the executive director of the health emergency program, said that while the W.H.O. still recommended masks only for front-line health workers and those who are sick or caring for someone who is, “we can certainly see circumstances in which the use of masks, both homemade or cloth masks, at community level may help in an overall comprehensive response to this disease.”

Senator Patrick J. Toomey, Republican of Pennsylvania, has been one of the most vocal supporters of wearing masks. In an interview from the basement of his home, where he is isolating because of his recent contact with lawmakers who tested positive for the virus, he said wearing masks would help limit the effect of it.

“It just makes sense to have some kind of physical barrier that would reduce the droplets that are released when people speak and breathe,” Mr. Toomey said. “The idea is to protect everyone else. My mask protects you. Your mask protects me.”

Mr. Toomey said he spoke with Mr. Trump on Wednesday to urge him to recommend masks for everyone. He said the president seemed “very sympathetic” to the idea but did not reveal his course.

“He did acknowledge that it was under very serious consideration and the subject of fairly intense discussion among his team,” Mr. Toomey said.

He said it was “premature” to conclude that Americans would not wear masks. “Who’s to say that people won’t respond in a way that this becomes acceptable and normal?” he asked.

Evidence arguing for the use of face masks to limit the spread of the coronavirus continues to mount. A study published Friday in the journal Nature found that flat surgical face masks significantly reduced the number of virus-carrying droplets that mask wearers released into the surrounding air.

Although the study did not look at the new coronavirus, researchers based their analysis on closely related seasonal coronaviruses that cause the common cold and are similar in size to the virus that causes the disease Covid-19. They also looked at influenza viruses and rhinoviruses that typically spread in winter.

The researchers asked 246 people with suspected respiratory viral infections to breathe into a machine for 30 minutes to measure the amount of virus they exhaled. Half of the participants wore a face mask, while the other half performed the experiment without any face covering. Among 111 people whose infections were later confirmed with a lab test, masks stopped the spread of all seasonal coronavirus and more than 70 percent of influenza virus infections, the study showed. Masks were not as effective in reducing transmission of rhinoviruses, or the common cold.

For the current coronavirus pandemic, all health officials, including those at the W.H.O. and C.D.C., agree that masks should be worn by anyone with symptoms like a cough or fever, and anyone caring for someone with a confirmed or suspected case.

Maggie Haberman and Knvul Sheikh contributed reporting from New York.

<|endoftext|>

Good morning.

(Don’t get California Today by email? Here’s the sign-up.)

In talking about California’s response to the spread of the coronavirus outbreak, Gov. Gavin Newsom has been unequivocal: The state needs more hospital capacity — and lots of it.

Mr. Newsom has said that the state needs to add 50,000 beds to get ahead of the expected surge of patients.

On Monday, he said, that surge is materializing: The number of people who have been hospitalized with the coronavirus has increased over the last four days to 1,432 from 746, and the number of patients in intensive care has tripled to nearly 600 in that time.

The state has been able to add places to care for patients, including aboard a 1,000-bed Navy hospital ship, which arrived at the Port of Los Angeles from San Diego on Friday, and at convention centers around the state.

But none of that does much good without front-line workers — doctors, nurses, paramedics, psychologists, pharmacists and dentists — who have the skills to care for patients.

“It requires people,” Mr. Newsom said.

So, he announced a new initiative aimed at tapping a pool of some 37,000 retired or part-time health care professionals to help the thousands already working through the crisis.

[Read the latest updates on the coronavirus pandemic around the world.]

Here’s what to know about the new effort, the California Health Corps:

Wait — is the governor saying that 37,000 health care professionals will just be sent back into the work force?

No, nobody’s being required to work. And it will take time and effort to ensure that everyone who would like to help is properly vetted.

The governor said that 37,000 number was “the universe” of possible workers.

Mr. Newsom signed an executive order that he said would “provide flexibility” to waive some licensing and certification requirements until the end of June.

That will allow some medical retirees, as well as students who are almost finished with their training, to join the work force. They’ll be “deployed” somewhere in the state according to their preference whenever possible.

Those who raise their hands will be subjected to some kind of screening in lieu of normal licensing, the order said.

This sounds almost too simple. What are the catches?

As CalMatters reported, there are still many unanswered questions about how all of this will work.

Also, even before the state’s almost 40 million residents were given a blanket order to stay home, Californians who were 65 or older were told not to go out, since they are especially vulnerable if they are infected with the coronavirus.

The list of requirements on the state’s Health Corps website does not specifically discourage older doctors from joining the ranks, despite the fact that older Californians have been told to stay home.

Will people be paid?

Yes, and they’ll get malpractice insurance, too.

[Learn more or register at healthcorps.ca.gov.]

We often link to sites that limit access for nonsubscribers. We appreciate your reading Times coverage, but we also encourage you to support local news if you can.

Even as the White House has been consumed with responding to the coronavirus crisis, Trump administration officials have raced to complete a new rule, expected to be announced today, that would virtually undo Obama-era fuel efficiency standards. [The New York Times]

California built up a huge reserve of ventilators, masks and other equipment that would be critical right now. But the state let it collapse. [Reveal]

Bay Area officials in the first counties to order residents to shelter in place extended the restrictions until the end of April. (The state’s order to stay at home didn’t have a set end date.)[The Mercury News]

Here’s what it means to “shelter in place.” [The New York Times]

Mayor Eric Garcetti of Los Angeles added more protections for renters on Monday, barring landlords from increasing rent on homes that fall under the city’s rent stabilization program. [The Los Angeles Times]

Four inmates and 18 workers at state prisons have tested positive for Covid-19. The news comes as family members of inmates and workers push for more protections in an environment where the virus could spread rapidly. [The Fresno Bee]

Read more about why the virus could spread easily behind bars. [The New York Times]

A swanky tennis facility in San Francisco will become a temporary homeless shelter during the coronavirus crisis. [The San Francisco Chronicle]

Emails and memos show how Tesla fought to keep its Fremont factory open, even after officials said they considered the plant a public safety risk. [Protocol]

These two women have lived through the Spanish flu, the Depression and the Holocaust. They shared their perspectives on this pandemic. [The New York Times]

I’ve written about March Fong Eu, the longtime California leader who took a literal sledgehammer to the patriarchy, how California helped shape McCarthyism and the work of Alfred Eichler, an architect for the California Department of Public Works.

I learned about all of them from digital exhibits put together by the California Secretary of State’s Office and the California State Archives.

If you’ve found that you have a bit more time lately for some low-impact mental exercise, I’d recommend checking out more of the exhibits, which you can find here. They’re full of gorgeous archival images and fascinating California history.

Right now, one called “Farmworkers in the Land of Plenty,” feels especially appropriate.

So go forth, dig into the weeds, look at some pictures of California agriculture circa 1879. You’re not missing anything outside, anyway.

California Today goes live at 6:30 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com. Were you forwarded this email? Sign up for California Today here and read every edition online here.

Jill Cowan grew up in Orange County, graduated from U.C. Berkeley and has reported all over the state, including the Bay Area, Bakersfield and Los Angeles — but she always wants to see more. Follow along here or on Twitter, @jillcowan.

California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and graduated from U.C. Berkeley.

<|endoftext|>

The casinos are deserted and thousands of hotel rooms are empty. But when Las Vegas, gripped by the coronavirus, needed space for a temporary homeless shelter, officials chose a location that does not have walls, or even a roof: an outdoor parking lot.

The City of Las Vegas and Clark County on Saturday opened the shelter, on the upper floor of a convention center parking lot, after the temporary closure of a 500-person homeless shelter run by Catholic Charities after a homeless man there tested positive for the coronavirus.

Medical students from Touro University, wearing protective gear, have been tasked with screening each homeless person for coronavirus symptoms before they enter the parking area, which has been partly covered with blue mats and closed off by metal barriers. The “shelter” will remain open until Friday, when the Catholic Charities shelter is expected to reopen, according to a joint statement by the city and county.

More than 6,500 Las Vegas residents lack permanent housing and nearly 70 percent of the city’s homeless population sleeps outside, according to the Las Vegas government. With a nearby homeless shelter overflowing, officials decided to expand into the parking lot, at the Cashman Center convention complex about seven miles from the Las Vegas Strip.

More than 50 volunteers laid out 24,000 square feet of carpet for the homeless to use as sleeping mats, which have been spaced six feet apart to abide by social distancing protocols, said David Riggleman, a spokesman for the City of Las Vegas. The shelter also has portable toilets and washing stations.

“It was a logistical heavy lift,” said Mr. Riggleman, describing the effort, which was accomplished with essentially a day’s notice. “That was a lot to pull together in a very short amount of time.”

Officials chose to use the parking lot instead of the buildings at the convention complex to reserve the space indoors for possible hospital overflow, he said.

In an attempt to stop the spread of the coronavirus, a vast majority of states and the Navajo Nation have given directives, affecting more than nine in 10 U.S. residents.

Still, the city has struggled to provide the temporary services while also addressing concerns about sanitation and the virus. Initially, officials had hoped to have the carpeting cleaned each day, but later found that the service provider was unable to adequately disinfect the material, Mr. Riggleman said, and so many are sleeping on concrete.

Las Vegas officials said they are concerned about the long-term financial impacts of the coronavirus shutdowns. Gov. Steve Sisolak of Nevada issued a 90-day moratorium on Sunday on all evictions and foreclosures in the state in an effort to stave off some of the most severe economic consequences.

But Mr. Riggleman said it was not clear whether that will be enough to prevent a rise in the city’s homeless population.

“We know we’re in for a rough road,” Mr. Riggleman said.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — Former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. on Wednesday night called for moving the Democratic National Convention from mid-July to August, making him the most prominent member of his party to say the convention must be rescheduled because of the coronavirus outbreak.

“I doubt whether the Democratic convention is going to be able to be held in mid-July, early July,” Mr. Biden told Jimmy Fallon on “The Tonight Show.” “I think it’s going to have to move into August.”

Mr. Fallon had not asked Mr. Biden about the convention’s timing. The former vice president was responding to a question about how the virus would affect the election.

Katie Peters, a spokeswoman for the Democratic National Convention Committee, said after Mr. Biden’s remarks that she expected the committee to reveal more details about changes to convention plans by the end of this week.

It was the second time in two days that Mr. Biden had questioned the timing of the convention, which is planned for July 13 to 16 in Milwaukee. On Tuesday he said during an MSNBC interview that it was “hard to envision” the convention’s taking place as planned.

Senior Democratic officials believe Mr. Biden would much prefer to hold a traditional convention attended by thousands as opposed to a virtual convention in which he receives the party’s presidential nomination without a made-for-television event. President Trump, who like Mr. Biden hopes to have his nomination be a televised coronation, has pushed Republicans to maintain plans for their convention, which is set to take place in August in Charlotte, N.C.

While Mr. Biden has a nearly insurmountable delegate lead over Senator Bernie Sanders, his last remaining rival for the Democratic presidential nomination, he cannot take formal control over convention planning until he clinches the nomination or Mr. Sanders drops out of the race.

transcript

We’re now leading the world in the number of cases, and we’ve got to act more swiftly, more rapidly. And you know, we’ve been through this — and it’s a slightly different way — in the past. And I hope they can learn some lessons from what we did right. And maybe what we did wrong. For a time, the president was talking about this crisis being a choice between protecting public health and reopening the economy. That was a false and dangerous way to think about the problem. The virus is why we — we have this economic crisis. Failure to arrest the spread of the virus is the direct cause of economic pain. But he should employ that Defense Production Act for all the things needed: gloves, masks, face shields, gowns, et cetera — that should be done yesterday, last week, a month ago. Get it done now. Listen to the scientists. A convention having tens of thousands of people in one arena is very different than having people walk into a polling booth with accurate spacing six to 10 feet apart, one at a time, going in and have machines scrubbed down. But I do think you’re going to be a lot more — I think you could hold the election as well, dealing with mail-in ballots, and same-day registration. I mean, there’s a lot of things that can be done.

Democratic officials, including the party’s chairman, Tom Perez, had hoped and predicted that the party would have a nominee by late April, but with so many states postponing their primaries because of public health concerns about the coronavirus, Mr. Biden cannot clinch the nomination until June at the earliest if Mr. Sanders remains in the race.

Changing the date of the Democratic convention would be a logistical feat, requiring a rebooking of thousands of hotel rooms along with the arena and conference center space in Milwaukee — or another city if the event is moved.

Before Mr. Biden’s call to change the convention’s date, Democrats planning the party’s quadrennial gathering had been in touch with officials from Fiserv Forum, the host arena, about alternate dates.

The two most likely new slots are Aug. 17 to 20 and Aug. 31 to Sept. 3. The arena is available those weeks, according to a Milwaukee Bucks official.

The Republican National Convention is scheduled for Aug. 24 to 27.

Milwaukee’s arena and convention center space is booked Aug. 10 to 12 by the insurer Northwestern Mutual’s annual meeting, which draws more than 12,000 people to the city, according to The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel.

Joe Solmonese, the chief executive of the Democratic National Convention, said in an interview Monday that he had six to eight weeks before any decisions must be made about moving the convention. Mr. Biden’s announcement is likely to hasten such choices.

“Providing an opportunity for our candidate to reaffirm our democratic values, unify the party and share his vision for a safer and stronger future for our country has never before felt more important,” Mr. Solmonese said Wednesday before Mr. Biden called for moving the convention. “As we continue to put plans in place for a successful Democratic National Convention this summer, we will balance protecting the health and well-being of convention attendees and our host city with our responsibility to deliver this historic and critical occasion.”

If the convention were moved, it would also affect how much money the party’s nominee would be able to spend over the summer. Candidates have separate pots of money they can tap into in a primary and a general election. The longer Mr. Biden is not the official nominee of the party, the less time he has to spend general election funds his campaign has raised.

<|endoftext|>

KEY WEST, Fla. — The vacation the passengers had imagined, a luxurious two-week voyage along the coast of South America to the southernmost tip of the hemisphere, turned into something else entirely.

Four passengers on board died, victims of the coronavirus. Many others began showing flulike symptoms, with nine people winding up in the ship hospital. The rest of the passengers from around the world who booked $3,500 passage on Holland America’s Zaandam spent weeks in limbo, trying to find a port that would offer an end to their horrific, nearly four-week voyage.

After days of debate, Florida finally relented and the ship and a second vessel accompanying it, the Rotterdam, pulled into the dock in Fort Lauderdale late Thursday afternoon.

“We are able to help the people on board in a humanitarian way and ensure they are able to go home with their families,” Dale Holness, the Broward County mayor, said in announcing the deal. “We are grateful that we were able to find a solution that benefits everyone.”

With cruise ships widely blamed for spreading an illness the likes of which have not been experienced in a century, Florida officials had worried about the potential consequences. As more ships have come to port with sick passengers and crew members who require hospitalization, local authorities were concerned that accommodating people from outside their cities could strain resources just when hospitals are already experiencing crushing volumes of emergency room patients.

A long day of final negotiations began when the ships arrived three miles off the Florida shore early Thursday, still in international waters.

A team of local, federal, public health and law enforcement authorities determined that the company’s preliminary plan for evacuating the ship was not adequate and initially denied permission for the ship to enter U.S. territory, but allowed the ships to proceed once an agreement for safely evacuating the passengers was approved.

The debate underscored the challenges that federal officials and the cruise industry have faced in repatriating thousands of people stranded at sea. “We view this as a big, big problem and we do not want to see people dumped in southern Florida right now,” Gov. Ron DeSantis told Fox News on Monday.

President Trump suggested that compassion was in order.

“They’re dying, so we have to do something, and the governor knows that, too,” Mr. Trump said on Wednesday. “We have to help the people. They are in big trouble.”

Some local authorities in Florida said it was unfair to ask them to provide the solution, instead of having the federal government step in.

“Why is this being hurled on the people with the least amount of ability to solve this?” said Michael Udine, a county commissioner.

Gregory Tony, the Broward County sheriff, expressed sympathy for the passengers but said he had an obligation to protect residents of his county.

“We are the United States of America. We have never turned away people in need or those that are sick,” he said. “But these are very, very critical circumstances.”

The explosive spread of the coronavirus has plagued a series of cruise ships that over the past several weeks have been seeking safe harbor as their passengers continue to sicken on board.

The problem first showed up aboard Carnival’s Diamond Princess in Japan, where more than 700 got sick. The Grand Princess had to send its passengers to multiple quarantines around the United States. Carnival evacuated several hundred supposedly healthy Americans and Canadians who were on the Costa Luminosa; they then flew commercial flights home and many promptly got sick. At least one person died.

The Zaandam left Buenos Aires on March 7 with more than 1,200 passengers on board. Things quickly went wrong. The World Health Organization declared Covid-19 a pandemic and Holland America suspended operations; the company expected to disembark its passengers in Chile, but when Chile closed its borders, the ship continued northward. More countries denied it entry.

Then passengers and crew started getting sick.

The vessel headed for Florida, but stalled for a time as Panama initially denied passage through the Panama Canal.

Holland America announced on Friday that four people had died on board, one each from the United States, Britain, the Netherlands and Sweden. Two of the dead tested positive for the coronavirus, the ship’s owner said.

Passengers were largely confined to their cabins, and the days wore on.

“How many people have to die on this ship waiting for medical care before he does the right thing and allows us to dock?” Andrea Anderson, 62, a passenger from Maineville, Ohio, said of the Florida governor.

She was in her cabin for 10 days, sharing a single Wi-Fi account with her husband and killing time by making paper airplanes. To limit visits from the ailing crew, passengers had to change their own linens and clean the room themselves. They were not allowed ice.

“Being locked in our cubicle room is definitely having a toll on us,” said Robert Rorison, a passenger from Surrey, British Columbia, before the ship docked. He spent much of the cruise in a 15 foot by 18 foot cabin with no balcony.

Although the illness affected the crew in larger numbers, the employees largely bounced back. Some passengers, most of whom are over the age of 65, did not.

Orlando Ashford, president of Holland America, wrote an open letter accusing nations of turning their backs on the ship, leaving some 2,500 people stranded.

“What happens when our supplies run out?” he wrote. “What happened to compassion and help thy neighbor?”

The agreement finally negotiated for evacuating the passengers included protections that exceeded safety procedures laid out by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Florida Department of Health, the administration of Port Everglades, the port in Broward County, said in a statement.

“Healthy passengers will return to their homes on Friday and Saturday on chartered flights to domestic and international destinations,” the statement said.

Ellen Kennedy, a spokeswoman for Port Everglades, said local authorities hashed out even the smallest of details with the cruise line.

“Disinfecting the luggage — how was that going to be done?” she said. “Who was going to do it? Who are the drivers that are picking people up? What ambulance service are you going to use?”

Holland American is a brand of Carnival, which had initially hoped to send more than 300 passengers on commercial flights. The agreement, however, calls for all of them to fly home on charters paid by the cruise line. All passengers were to receive health screenings.

The document shows 14 people are going straight to hospitals, and the rest are going to have their temperature taken to determine whether they are well enough to leave the ship.

Mr. Ashford thanked the president, the Florida governor and local authorities, who allowed the ships to enter. “These travelers could have been any one of us or our families, unexpectedly caught in the middle of this unprecedented closure of global borders that happened in a matter of days and without warning,” he said in a statement.

The disembarkation process should be complete by Friday, the company said.

William R. Burke, the chief maritime officer of Carnival, said the company brought on a few hundred fast-processing coronavirus tests that have been known to produce false negatives. Even so, nine of the 11 people the company tested came out positive, he said.

The company initially said that nearly 200 people were sick with flulike symptoms, but later said that figure was “cumulative.” Just 14 people were ill, Mr. Burke said on Tuesday.

More than half the passengers, those who had no symptoms, were transferred over the weekend from the Zaandam to the Rotterdam. The ships had been traveling together since.

Once they arrived off the coast of Florida, a team of local, federal, public health, port and law enforcement authorities determined the company’s initial plan for evacuating the ship was not adequate and denied permission for the ship to enter U.S. waters.

The ships were traveling with six doctors and nine nurses aboard the two vessels, Mr. Burke said. “We have the right equipment to try to nurse these people back to health. It is our intent to do just that, rather than rely on the local community, unless we get beyond our own capability.”

Before the ships docked, company officials had said that dozens of people had recovered, but 45 people were not well enough to travel and would remain on board.

The Coast Guard issued a notice this week that all foreign-flagged cruise ships carrying more than 50 people must be prepared to care for any sick passengers and crew members at sea for an “indefinite period of time” or to seek medical assistance from other countries during the coronavirus pandemic.

In a statement Thursday, Mr. Udine, the county commissioner, said he tried but failed to have the passengers quarantined on a Navy base or one of the company’s private islands, or at a port outside Florida’s coronavirus “hot zone.”

“The cruise company wanted to just drop people off and let them fly home,” he said.

Senator Rick Scott of Florida also said that all the passengers should be held in quarantine and tested. But federal health officials stressed that they would no longer be holding cruise ship passengers in quarantine.

“That was earlier in the pandemic,” Dr. Cindy Friedman, a member of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s cruise ship task force, told Broward County commissioners earlier this week. What asymptomatic passengers need, she said, is a mask and to go straight home.

The deal finally negotiated offered legal assurances, safeguards and hospital care at the company’s expense, Mr. Udine said.

Local officials had few choices, said Nan H. Rich, a Broward County commissioner. “Are we going to let the ship float out to sea and let the people die?”

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — The Trump administration has substantially scaled back paid leave requirements for employers that were created by a new coronavirus relief law, effectively exempting many small businesses in a move that infuriated lawmakers who had fought to expand the benefit.

In guidance issued on Wednesday, the Labor Department said that employers at companies with fewer than 50 workers had broad latitude to decline to offer the 12 weeks of paid leave that the law required for workers whose children were home from school or for child care because of the coronavirus pandemic. The legislation, which provides two weeks of paid sick leave and 12 weeks of paid family leave, and reimburses employers for it with tax credits, already excludes workers at companies with more than 500 employees.

In all, more than 75 percent of American workers are at companies that qualify for exemptions from the law.

Enacted in March, the law said that businesses with fewer than 50 employees could be exempted from providing the leave if it would prevent the business from functioning, leaving it to the Department of Labor to specify what that meant. The department on Wednesday issued its guidelines, giving an expansive definition that allowed small businesses significant leeway not to provide the leave. Under the guidelines, small businesses cannot be exempted from providing sick leave for an employee’s own illness.

But companies with fewer than 50 employees could decline to provide paid leave for child care if doing so would “cause the small business to cease operating,” if workers’ absences would pose “a substantial risk” to the company, or if there were not enough workers “able, willing and qualified” to fill in for the person seeking leave.

Health care providers and first responders, as well as certain federal government employees, can also be denied the paid leave.

Democrats also raised alarm that the new guidelines added requirements that were not in the original law, including that employers could ask employees for certification of the need to take leave, and that employers needed to have work for the employee to do in order for workers to qualify for leave.

Senator Patty Murray of Washington and Representative Rosa DeLauro of Connecticut, both Democrats who pressed for the paid leave expansion, on Wednesday urged Eugene Scalia, the labor secretary, to rescind some guidelines. In a letter, they wrote to Mr. Scalia that the guidelines “violate congressional intent” and “contradict the plain language” of the legislation.

“Given that congressional intent was to respond to the unprecedented nature of this pandemic,” the lawmakers wrote, the Labor Department had “the responsibility to provide the maximum flexibility for workers during this crisis — not restricting their leave to when employers grant their consent.”

Mr. Scalia said in a statement on Wednesday that the law provided “unprecedented paid leave benefits to American workers affected by the virus, while ensuring that businesses are reimbursed.”

The Labor Department guidelines are likely to become part of a broader set of disputes between Congress and the Trump administration over the execution of more than $2 trillion worth of new programs created to respond to the coronavirus crisis, hastily laid out in three sweeping laws enacted over the past month.

The expansion of paid leave provisions was among the most contentious issues as lawmakers and administration officials negotiated legislation last month intended to bolster the social safety net and help families struggling from the reach of the virus. Substantial changes made to the legislation after it passed the House in a post-midnight vote curtailed the scope of the benefits, in part because of the administration’s concerns about burdening small businesses.

The legislation ultimately passed the Senate and was signed into law last month, with Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, counseling Republicans “to gag and vote for it anyway.”

Democrats have vowed to continue pushing to expand the paid leave provisions in future legislation to prop up an economy that has largely been forced to shutter to slow the spread of the virus. But Republicans have remained reluctant to sign on to such provisions, and Republicans on the House Ways and Means Committee hailed the “greater flexibility” now given to small businesses in a news release on Thursday.

Liberal economists who backed the paid leave program warned that the restrictions would force many workers to make a difficult decision — between caring for their children and keeping their jobs — at a time when fear and uncertainty are running high.

They also raised concerns about the broad exemptions to the program that the Labor Department carved out for health care workers.

“Exempting health care providers and emergency responders threatens our nation’s ability to fight back against the coronavirus and makes us all more vulnerable,” said Heather Boushey, the president of the Washington Center for Equitable Growth, a think tank focused on inequality and growth. “Our health care workers are the most susceptible to exposure and are in a position to pass it on to other patients. These are the workers who most need to be protected.”

<|endoftext|>

MIAMI — Florida’s coronavirus cases kept ballooning, especially in the dense neighborhoods of Miami and Fort Lauderdale. Hospitals in Fort Myers and Naples begged for donations of masks and other protective equipment. Young people started to die.

And still, Gov. Ron DeSantis resisted. The man entrusted with keeping many of the country’s grandparents safe did not want to dictate that all Floridians had to stay at home.

What it took for Mr. DeSantis to change his mind on Wednesday and finally issue a statewide order were a phone call with President Trump and a grave reckoning. A day earlier, the White House had projected how many American lives might be lost — up to 240,000 — without a national commitment to immediate, drastic action in every state.

The number of coronavirus infections in Florida had jumped by more than 1,000 on Tuesday, its largest 24-hour increase, to reach nearly 7,000, giving rise to worries that the infection was already dangerously out of hand.

For Mr. DeSantis, a 41-year-old first-term Republican governor considered a contender for higher political office, relenting was an acknowledgment that the Florida economy, so reliant on tourism, would inevitably grind to a halt because of the virus. Without statewide measures, recovery from the pandemic might only take longer.

“People aren’t just going to go back to work” by April 15, Mr. DeSantis said at a news conference in Tallahassee, the state capital, calling the stringent social-distancing orders that take effect on Friday “a national pause button.”

Thirty-seven states have adopted statewide orders for people to stay at home, including most recently Georgia and Mississippi. The full scale of the virus threat delivered by the White House was a powerful new message to conservative governors who have been following the president’s lead.

Texas, where Gov. Greg Abbott expressed a preference for leaving such initiatives to local authorities, remains the largest state in the country without such an order; it has about 4,000 coronavirus cases, significantly fewer than Florida.

At least 101 people have died in Florida, and testing, especially of younger and asymptomatic people, remains insufficient.

Photos of crowded beaches and megachurches shared on social media over the weekend prompted national outrage directed at Florida, which has blamed its outbreak in part on outsiders. The sheriff in Hillsborough County, which includes Tampa, had a Pentecostal pastor arrested on Monday for recklessly endangering hundreds of parishioners he beckoned to church.

So Mr. DeSantis’s stay-at-home order, even though it lists many exceptions and does not close public beaches, came as a relief to public health officials and hospital administrators who had been clamoring for stronger efforts to keep people home.

“I am very happy to hear this news,” said Dr. Lawrence Antonucci, president and chief executive of the Lee Health hospital system in Fort Myers. “This should help tremendously in slowing the spread of Covid-19 in Florida.”

The coronavirus poses a unique risk for Florida because a quarter of the state’s population of more than 21 million is older than 60, a percentage surpassed only by Maine. The economy relies in large part on an $86 billion-a-year tourism industry fueled by 125 million annual visitors, including young spring break visitors who may have helped spread the virus.

“Obviously in Florida, the tourism is totally shot right now,” Mr. DeSantis said.

The governor has been reluctant to break with Mr. Trump, according to Republican officials, after the president helped him win the Republican primary and then the governorship in 2018. Their close relationship has weighed on the president throughout the federal response to the coronavirus threat: A newly declared Florida resident, Mr. Trump sees the state as vital to his re-election, and he has been responsive to Mr. DeSantis’s requests for such things as drive-through testing sites and protective equipment for health care workers. They have spoken by phone four times in the past week, according to the governor’s public schedule.

As the Trump administration has put a spotlight on the spiraling number of coronavirus cases in New York and New Jersey, Mr. DeSantis has until now tried to frame the state’s outbreak as primarily a problem for Miami, Fort Lauderdale and West Palm Beach.

Those areas are home to more than half of the state’s infections, including six deaths at a single assisted-living facility. The governor repeatedly pointed to the fact that millions of visitors arrive to South Florida from abroad — and from New York.

His initial plan was to flood the hardest-hit region with testing sites and a field hospital, and try to limit new travelers. The White House listened. Florida has received material for three testing sites and four shipments from the federal stockpile of supplies, including 500,000 N95 masks, 250,000 face shields, 714,000 gloves, 1.2 million surgical masks and 200,000 gowns.

Last week, Mr. DeSantis imposed a quarantine on travelers from the New York area. Then, on Saturday morning, he phoned Mr. Trump and complained that New Yorkers flocking to Fort Lauderdale and other nearby cities were still bringing the virus with them. Mr. Trump responded on Twitter, saying that he was considering a quarantine of the New York tristate area, a statement that flummoxed officials in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.



People in Florida and elsewhere continued to travel widely during the week of March 23, potentially exposing more people to the coronavirus, phone data shows.

The president’s aides — some of whom have tired of Mr. DeSantis’s special requests and believe he takes advantage of the relationship with the White House — tried to explain to the president that it would be almost impossible to enforce such a quarantine. Mr. Trump has also resisted a broader national stay-at-home order, which his advisers see as at odds with years of Republican orthodoxy about states’ rights, and unfair to states that are not experiencing major outbreaks.

On Sunday, the White House dropped its earlier, rosier suggestion that stringent social-distancing measures could be lifted by mid-April, and extended national guidelines to combat the coronavirus until April 30. And on Tuesday, Mr. Trump sounded a distinctly somber note, as he acknowledged for the first time that the next two weeks will be “painful” and allowed that predictions of more than 100,000 deaths were realistic possibilities.

Still, when Mr. DeSantis on Monday signed a more limited stay-at-home order for four counties from Key West to Palm Beach, he insisted that it would be needed only through April 15. Because most of the affected cities and counties, like other large jurisdictions in the state, had already enacted their own orders, the governor conceded his own action was of little consequence.

Cellphone location data showed that people in places like Jacksonville and Daytona Beach in northeast Florida, which were not on lockdown, were frequently traveling across county lines. Commissioners in southwest Florida’s Lee County, which likewise had no stay-at-home order, maintained that they did not need one, in part because the governor had not suggested it.

“It seems like he’s listening to the Florida Chamber and Associated Industries and business interests more than he is to medical professionals and health care professionals, which is incredibly disappointing,” Mayor Rick Kriseman of St. Petersburg said before the governor’s latest order. He added that neither the governor nor his staff had called at any point to ask about the city’s needs.

“I may not have agreed on a whole lot of things with Rick Scott when he was governor,” said Mr. Kriseman, a Democrat. “But every time there was a storm approaching the state, I got a phone call from him saying, ‘Just wanted to check in, see how you’re doing, is there anything you need?’” (Mr. Scott, now the state’s junior Republican senator, called him on Saturday.)

In an attempt to stop the spread of the coronavirus, a vast majority of states and the Navajo Nation have given directives, affecting more than nine in 10 U.S. residents.

On Monday afternoon, Dr. Scott Rivkees, the Florida surgeon general, spoke with Dr. Ali H. Mokdad, a professor of health metrics sciences and chief strategy officer for population health at the University of Washington, Dr. Mokdad said. Dr. Mokdad, who keeps a home in Daytona Beach, said he recommended that Florida issue a statewide stay-at-home order.

“I told him, ‘Listen, they are working very well here in Washington State,’” he said. “‘You could save a lot of lives there, and you could spare your hospitals a big and heavy demand.’”

“They could have saved lives — all of us, even in Seattle — if we’d enacted these measures earlier on,” Dr. Mokdad added. “Everybody made, in a way, a belated response.”

On Tuesday, shortly before Mr. Trump’s grim coronavirus news briefing, Mr. DeSantis said one reason he had not extended the order statewide was because the White House coronavirus task force had made no such recommendation.

By the time Mr. DeSantis and Mr. Trump spoke on Wednesday, Mr. DeSantis, now under intense public pressure from local officials, Democrats and a growing chorus of national commentators, had come to the conclusion that he needed to do more. When he had decided initially that it would be necessary to focus only on infections flaring in South Florida, he said, the president had backed him.

“But at the same time, he understood that this is another 30-day situation,” he said. “You’ve got to just do what makes the most sense.”

Patricia Mazzei reported from Miami, and Maggie Haberman from New York.

<|endoftext|>

A group of residents from an island town in Maine cut down a tree and dragged it into the middle of a road in an attempt to forcibly quarantine three roommates they believed could have the new coronavirus after arriving from out of state, law enforcement officials said on Saturday.

The tree was discovered after one of the roommates left their residence on Cripple Creek Road in Vinalhaven, an island off the coast of Maine, at about 3:30 p.m. on Friday to see why the cable service wasn’t working, the Knox County Sheriff’s Office said in a statement.

“While investigating the downed tree, a neighbor started yelling at him and a group of people showed up and began to gather around,” the sheriff’s office said. “Believing the group may be there to harm him,” it added, the man fled back to the residence and alerted his roommates. 

An earlier statement from the sheriff’s office said someone had reported that “several people with guns had cut down a tree and were telling them that they need to stay quarantined.”

The episode highlights how states across the country have grown leery of out-of-town license plates and visitors amid the spread of the coronavirus, as people flee cities that have been hit hard by the pandemic for vacation homes and wide-open spaces elsewhere. 

In Rhode Island, police officers and National Guard members were deployed to collect contact information from out-of-state drivers at the state border and inform them they must self-quarantine. Hawaii, which thrives on tourism, is asking visitors to stay away for a month. The Outer Banks of North Carolina are shut to nonresidents. And in Alaska, almost all people, whether or not they live there, must quarantine themselves upon arrival.The roommates in Maine used a radio to contact the Coast Guard and a drone to keep an eye on the group outside until the authorities arrived, the sheriff’s office said.

The group had dispersed by the time law enforcement arrived, the sheriff’s office added, but “it was apparent that the tree had been cut down and dragged into the roadway to block it.”

The sheriff’s office said deputies “learned that there is a general belief by some island residents that the Cripple Creek residents are supposed to be quarantined because they came here from another state and could have Covid-19,” the disease caused by the coronavirus.

But the authorities found that the three roommates had been living in Vinalhaven for about 30 days, much longer than the two-week quarantine guideline issued by public health officials, and that none of them had any symptoms of the virus.

The sheriff’s office said it was “concerned that some believe that anyone from out of the state is potentially infected and needs to be quarantined.”

“Whether someone is a Maine resident or not, they have the right to free movement and anyone who infringes upon that free movement is potentially violating the law,” it added.

Amid the coronavirus pandemic, some governors have begun placing restrictions on visitors in an effort to prevent the virus from spreading further into their states.

On Saturday, President Trump said he would not impose a quarantine on New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, but would instead issue a “strong” travel advisory. Later that night, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention released a formal advisory, urging the residents of those three states to “refrain from nonessential domestic travel for 14 days effective immediately.”

State Representative Genevieve McDonald, a Maine Democrat who represents Vinalhaven, said on Facebook that “there are two guys from N.J. on Vinalhaven who have been renting a house since September while working on a construction job.”

“They went to the mainland, and were targeted because of their license plate when they arrived back on Vinalhaven,” she said.

An exchange between the roommates and some local residents “apparently didn’t go very well,” she said, adding that “a group of local vigilantes decided to take matters into their own hands, and barricade these guys into their rental property.”

Ms. McDonald called the commotion “a tremendous waste of resources,” noting that it had drawn a response from several officials.

“Now is not the time to develop or encourage an ‘us vs. them’ mentality,” she said. “Targeting people because of their license plates will not serve any of us well.”

Ms. McDonald added that “except for in the most extreme circumstances, we do not have the authority to control the movement of U.S. citizens within our borders.”

She signed off the note with simple instructions: “Stay home, wash your hands, don’t talk to strangers, and don’t waste the time of our first responders.”

<|endoftext|>

It was just before 8 a.m. on March 19 when Alexondra Purnomo, a schoolteacher in Rome, decided that all rules were off. She was under coronavirus lockdown, but it was her birthday.

So Ms. Purnomo, 38, and a roommate opened a bottle of prosecco for breakfast. Later, she slipped away for a furtive meeting on Via della Villa di Lucina, where another friend handed off — without touching — a slice of birthday tiramisù.

Back at home, as Ms. Purnomo sat down to lunch, her roommate turned her laptop around to face her and there they were: nearly a dozen friends arrayed on Zoom, wishing Ms. Purnomo a happy birthday. One wore a boa. They sang, held up signs and raised glasses in toasts.

“Everybody was eating whatever they were eating, and chatting, and everybody obviously was drinking, because we are all in quarantine anyway,” she said.

This is a birthday party in the era of the coronavirus, when families and friends are marking another year of life with newfound gratitude, in joyful defiance of the virus that is denying it to so many.

The pandemic has upended traditional celebrations in ways that reflect the need for social distancing, the difficulty of travel and the hard realities of supply shortages.

Families and friends, who previously celebrated in person, are now meeting in the virtual world. Children, who frolicked in party spaces or apartments in past years, are now contained in a grid on Zoom — still boisterous, but at least there is less to clean up.

Pictures of gifts delayed in transit are printed out and wrapped up as place holders. Custom cakes are left on doorsteps. Packages are wiped down. Magic shows are performed online.

In interviews, more than a dozen people who had recently planned or celebrated their birthdays agreed that they were lucky to be able to have a party, no matter how transformed or downgraded, when so many were struggling economically, sick or dying.

“Part of it is realizing that celebrations are really, truly, just about love,” said Sarah Frantzreb, a nurse practitioner in New York. For her daughter Sloane’s first birthday, the family planned to decorate her high chair, put a glitter hat on her and wrap toys that had belonged to Ms. Frantzreb’s older child. They invited relatives in three states to a B.Y.O.C. (bring your own cake) party online.

“Each year, really, is a gift that should be celebrated,” Ms. Frantzreb said.

In times of high anxiety and stress, as during a war or a pandemic, adult behavior becomes more ritualized, said Dimitris Xygalatas, a professor of anthropology and psychology at the University of Connecticut. The meaning of birthday parties becomes more poignant, and the more effort they take and more witnesses they have, the greater the sense of importance, he said.

“When you can’t have the celebration that you usually have, you are missing the human connection,” Dr. Xygalatas said. “People are finding ways to make up for it, synchronizing activities so it feels like we are one.”

Among the ways people have found: the drive-by party, in which children wave from cars rolling past the house of the birthday boy or girl, who is watching from inside. There is also the walk-by party, such as the one Zane Chester, a 6-year-old in Illinois, had on March 24.

His mother, Kimberly Chester, thought of the idea while on the daily stroll her family had been taking through their Deerfield neighborhood since the shutdown. A day before Zane’s birthday, she asked neighbors on Facebook to put signs in their windows in bold letters, so he could see them as he walked by.

The community responded. On their walk through the neighborhood on the big day, the Chester family found cars festooned with balloons and birthday messages in chalk on the sidewalk. One woman left a cake, with Batman in fondant, on her porch. Some greeted Zane from the threshold of their front doors.

“It was like personalized trick-or-treating,” Ms. Chester said.

And then there is the stand-by party. In New York City, participants at a birthday block party recently stood — six feet apart — outside the building of a friend to wish her well. In Stamford, Conn., on March 22, Liatte Lasher, a teacher, and her friends drove in seven cars and remained parked outside the home of another friend, who turned 35 that day.

They wore hats, and blew into noisemakers. “People are looking to do something a little more special this year,” she said.

Elizabeth Shepherd, 35, a Brooklyn car service owner, canceled a resort trip for her March 26 birthday. She stayed home, grateful for the company of her wife, Mona, and the music they enjoyed together. “I am happy to be not sick, that is for sure,” Ms. Shepherd said.

The shape of pandemic birthdays, especially for older people, can be dictated by risk tolerance. Siri Bjerknes Ekeberg, who lives in Oslo, said she, her husband and their children lit candles stuck in brownies from their home while her mother-in-law, who turned 74 on March 23, watched on FaceTime from hers, safely distant out of concern for her health.

“We would have been together if it was not for this,” Ms. Ekeberg said.

In New York City, Nadia Nguyen was creating a “Pandemic Cookbook” as a gift for her husband’s 35th birthday. It was to be a compilation of recipes from friends using ingredients they had scrounged up in their kitchens. Ms. Nguyen’s own entry was mac ’n’ cheese, with kale pesto she and her husband discovered in the freezer.

“Especially now, it is important to acknowledge the passing of time,” Ms. Nguyen said.

According to Tim Reeskens, a sociology professor at Tilburg University in the Netherlands, a person’s birth date defines rites of passage, the sequence of generations and the expectations of aging. The birthday celebration, he added, is the most individualized of a society’s annual rituals.

“As societies become more economically wealthy, people put more emphasis on self-expression,” Dr. Reeskens said. “It has to do with increased individualization.”

Teresa Chi, 39, a New York City-based teacher, and her husband, Ryan Bagg, took up guitars and a tambourine to celebrate their son Rowan’s fourth birthday. His previous parties have been crowded affairs, with children and adults in the park or at his grandparents’ building.

But this month, it was just the four of them, including 1-year-old Josh, in their apartment. On the morning of Rowan’s birthday, they woke him up with four candles in a slice of coffeecake. His gift, bath toys ordered online, had been delivered. Videos, messages and singing Animojis trickled in throughout the day from friends and relatives far away.

“You do what you can,” Ms. Chi said. “I am sure he still felt that he had his birthday. But it wasn’t the same.”

<|endoftext|>

Welcome to Poll Watch, our weekly look at polling data and survey research on the candidates, voters and issues that will shape the 2020 election.

Pandemics are not partisan.

And the coronavirus outbreak is no different: It threatens Americans of all political persuasions, and a fast-growing body of survey data shows that this pandemic has affected how both Democrats and Republicans describe their daily habits, the state of their pocketbooks and even their mental well-being.

At the beginning of the crisis, stark political differences emerged over whether people viewed the virus as a real threat. But now that gap is rapidly closing — driven by similarities in life experiences, and by the overwhelming attention now being paid to the pandemic by top officials in both parties.

Last month, the Bloomberg Consumer Comfort Index — a polling indicator of the national economic mood — recorded its sharpest two-week drop in 34 years of collecting data.

A large majority of both Republicans and Democrats think the worst is yet to come, according to other polls. Three-fourths of Americans said so in a survey conducted through the beginning of this week by the Kaiser Family Foundation.

“It is rare to see something change so dramatically in a two-week period,” said Mollyann Brodie, the executive director of the foundation’s survey research program. “Our last poll was a couple weeks ago. And then in this poll we saw a real narrowing of the partisan divide.”

She continued: “I think some of that is just the course of the pandemic. It spread a lot farther across the country, and a lot more people were seeing it in their daily lives. But I think you also can’t dismiss the change of tone at the top. President Trump really changed his tone over that time period, and certainly his followers picked up on those cues.”

Common experiences seem to be playing a big role. Twenty-two percent of both Democrats and Republicans said in the Kaiser poll that they had lost income from a job or business because of the virus. Independents were markedly more likely to say so, at 30 percent.

And Republicans lagged just behind Democrats on reporting a range of other experiences: from becoming unable to get nonvirus-related medical care (30 percent of Republicans; 37 percent of Democrats) to suddenly finding themselves without access to groceries (28 percent of Republicans; 34 percent of Democrats).

On a lighter note, members of both parties are using technology to keep in touch with loved ones at just about the same rate. More than three in five Republicans and Democrats said they had video chatted with a friend or family member in the past week.

Of course, there are signs that Democrats and Republicans still see this crisis differently. While most Democrats said the virus had had a negative impact on their mental health, two-thirds of Republicans said it hadn’t, according to the Kaiser poll. And unsurprisingly, Republicans were far more likely to trust the president to handle the crisis.

Differences in geography could also be playing some role. Republicans are more likely to live in rural areas, many of which have not been as affected by the virus. And Republican governors have generally been slower to issue stay-at-home orders, meaning a possibly less drastic shake-up in the lives of their residents.

In another poll released Thursday, by The Associated Press and the NORC Center for Public Affairs Research, most Democrats described the national economy as poor, but 65 percent of Republicans said it was still doing well. Independents tend to agree more with Democrats here, and over all, Americans are far more likely to say the economy is in bad shape. That is a huge change from January, when two-thirds of Americans said the economy was doing well in a different AP-NORC survey.

Since January there has been a seven-percentage-point jump in the share of Americans describing their financial situation as poor; 38 percent now do, the AP-NORC poll found.

More than six million people joined the unemployment rolls last week, but we’re not quite in a depression yet: In the Kaiser survey, 7 percent of respondents said they were unemployed and looking for work. That is far lower than the nearly 25-percent unemployment rate at the height of the Great Depression.

But among all respondents without jobs, 54 percent said they had lost work at the hands of the virus. With the crisis’s impact expected to grow only deeper and more widespread over the coming weeks, those numbers will most likely rise.

Unemployed Americans were twice as likely as those with jobs to tell Kaiser that the virus had had a major impact on their mental health.

And unemployed people were more likely to express grave concern that supplies would run out at their hospital — and that the nation’s health care system would become overrun. They were more apt to be seriously worried that local businesses would wind up permanently closing because of the crisis. On all of these measures, about three-fifths of jobless Americans expressed strong concern, while the number was closer to half among those with jobs.

These feelings may come partly from experience: The Kaiser poll found that 54 percent of jobless Americans said the crisis had already prevented them from getting medical care for conditions not related to the virus. And 50 percent of them said the pandemic had prevented them from getting prescription medication.

In both cases, the numbers were far less dire among respondents who were still working.

Yet the overall story, Dr. Brodie said, is one of commonality. “Nobody’s been immune,” she said. “Certainly there are some harder-hit groups: groups that are part-time workers, paid by the job, or by the hour. But what is really striking is that the impact has been wide and deep and quick.”

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — Representative Max Rose, a freshman Democrat from New York, announced on Tuesday that he would deploy with the National Guard on Wednesday to assist the hard-hit city’s coronavirus response efforts, making him the first member of Congress to do so.

Mr. Rose, a captain in the Army National Guard and decorated combat veteran in Afghanistan who represents Staten Island and parts of southern Brooklyn, said he chose to deploy to “do my small part” to combat the pandemic, and would help set up field hospitals in Staten Island and other parts of New York.

With Congress in recess and members working remotely from their districts, Mr. Rose said he believed the severity of the situation in New York required him to take a more a hands-on role rather than attending to the seemingly endless string of conference calls, including town halls, and other socially distanced activities that now fill lawmakers’ days.

“I do see this as an opportunity to serve New York City and my community, and to serve on the ground from an operational perspective,” Mr. Rose said in an interview on Tuesday. “This is about working day-to-day to make sure we can withstand and weather this surge.”

Known in the halls of the Capitol as a swaggering (and sometimes profane) straight shooter, Mr. Rose ousted a Republican incumbent in 2018 in a district President Trump won by nearly 10 points, after a campaign built on his knack for retail politics and fund-raising prowess. His military background — he earned a Purple Heart and Bronze Star after he suffered injuries when his vehicle hit a roadside bomb in Afghanistan in 2013 — was a crucial piece of his biography that helped power his bid.

Mr. Rose rallied his colleagues to call on President Trump earlier this month to send the Navy hospital ship U.S.N.S. Comfort to New York to help relieve New York’s overwhelmed hospitals. Now, he has decided to become more personally involved in the response effort to a virus that has taken a grim toll on his district and others throughout the state.

In the interview, Mr. Rose cited a recent trip to the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in New York, which the National Guard helped turn into a makeshift hospital, as an example of the key role the reserve force can play in the crisis.

The National Guard in New York has activated over 2,000 personnel to help mitigate the spread of the virus, dispatching medics and technicians to establish and administer testing sites and troops to set up field hospitals.

Members of Congress are currently working from home and are not expected to return to Washington before April 20. Mr. Rose said on Tuesday that he would be able to return to the House and vote on legislation if needed, and noted that staff aides in his office would continue to assist his constituents and take on their casework.

“People are living in fear each and every day,” he said. “There is a fierce sense of urgency around this crisis. It is a fight that will define this generation.”

Nearly half a dozen other members of the House still serve in the National Guard. Representative Adam Kinzinger, Republican of Illinois, was activated last year for a two-week deployment conducting aerial surveillance over the southern border.

“It literally does pale in comparison to what our medical professions do every day,” Mr. Rose said. “I am just trying to do my duty and my small part.”

<|endoftext|>

Update: On Tuesday, a federal appeals court blocked Monday’s ruling, a move that allows authorities in Texas to resume carrying out their order that abortions have to be delayed during the cornavirus pandemic. Failure to comply, the state has said, could result in penalties of up to $1,000 or 180 days in jail. The Center for Reproductive Rights, which represents abortion clinics, said clinics in Texas were canceling appointments on Tuesday afternoon.

WASHINGTON — Abortion clinics in Texas can keep operating, a federal judge ruled on Monday, a week after the state’s attorney general said abortion was among the nonessential surgeries and medical procedures that had to be delayed because of the coronavirus.

The decision was a win for abortion providers, which had been scrambling to block similar restrictions in other states. Lawyers for clinics filed suit on Monday in Alabama, Iowa, Ohio and Oklahoma, states that had tried to include abortion in medical procedures that had to be delayed to preserve protective gear for medical workers.

In his decision, Judge Lee Yeakel of United States District Court for the Western District of Texas wrote that he was granting a request from clinics to temporarily prevent the policy from taking effect. He argued that it amounted to a ban on abortion, and on that topic, he wrote, “the Supreme Court has spoken clearly. There can be no outright ban on such a procedure.”

The judge’s ruling temporarily blocks the order on abortion from taking effect while the lawsuit takes its course through the court system. A spokeswoman for Attorney General Ken Paxton of Texas did not respond when asked whether the office would appeal the judge’s ruling.

Clinics welcomed the decision and said they were hopeful the outcome in Texas would set a trend.

“This ruling sends a message to other states: Using this pandemic to ban abortion access is unconstitutional,” Nancy Northup, president of the Center for Reproductive Rights, which is representing clinics in Texas and Oklahoma, said in a statement. “Abortion care is time-sensitive and essential health care that has a profound impact on a person’s health and life, which is why it is protected as a constitutional right.”

States around the country have rushed in recent weeks to put emergency measures in place to protect precious medical equipment and gear as the coronavirus pandemic spreads across the nation.

This has included a temporary ban on medical procedures deemed nonessential, including certain kinds of dental work and orthopedic surgeries. In several states with Republican legislatures where anti-abortion groups are powerful, abortion was included.

Groups including Planned Parenthood, the American Civil Liberties Union and the Center for Reproductive Rights argued that political leaders were using the pandemic as an excuse to restrict abortion access.

<|endoftext|>

Good morning and welcome to On Politics, a daily political analysis of the 2020 elections based on reporting by New York Times journalists.

Sign up here to get On Politics in your inbox every weekday.

At this point, even the best-case coronavirus outcome is not looking very good. Speaking at the White House on Tuesday, Anthony Fauci and Deborah Birx, the top government doctors in charge of the crisis, said their target was to keep the nation’s deaths from the virus to under 240,000. In a scenario in which the government had done nothing to intervene, more than two million people could have died. Striking an uncharacteristically somber tone, President Trump warned, “I want every American to be prepared for the hard days that lie ahead.”

Fauci looked to New York for some (limited) signs of optimism. Saying that only by curbing people’s exposure to the virus, would the country be able to keep a handle on the fatalities, he ventured: “I don’t want to jump the gun on it. We’re seeing little inklings of this in New York.”

But the news coming from Andrew Cuomo, the state’s Democratic governor, was mostly grim. He announced on Tuesday morning that the virus had killed 332 people in New York since the day before — bringing the state’s total to 1,550. (That official toll will undoubtedly rise again this morning.) And for Cuomo, the crisis has hit home: He said at his daily news briefing that his brother, Chris, a CNN host, had contracted the virus. “He’s my best friend,” the governor said. “Now he’s quarantined in the basement. But he’s funny as heck. He says to me, ‘Even the dogs won’t come downstairs.’”

The ink is barely dry on the $2 trillion stimulus package that Trump signed last week, but House Democrats are already prepping to fight for more. It was the largest single stimulus bill in history, but the legislation’s provisions are not long-term. It offers most adults a series of one-time (not recurring) cash payments, and its expansions to unemployment benefits are good for just 13 weeks on top of what states normally allow. And millions of Americans have joined the unemployment rolls since the coronavirus began spreading widely a few weeks ago. Still, Mitch McConnell, the Senate majority leader, threw cold water on the idea of another big stimulus bill. “I’m not going to allow this to be an opportunity for the Democrats to achieve unrelated policy items they wouldn’t otherwise be able to pass,” he said Tuesday on the radio show of Hugh Hewitt, a conservative commentator.

Dr. Deborah Birx, the White House’s coronavirus response coordinator, spoke on Tuesday as President Trump and Dr. Anthony Fauci listened.

By Matthew Haag

A cadre of progressive Democrats in New York, who led a recent partisan takeover of the State Legislature, have proposed a generous bailout for tenants and property owners who are hit hard in the cratering economy.

Andrew Cuomo has ordered a 90-day moratorium on evictions, but some lawmakers, including Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, say that is not enough. One of the leading bills in the State Legislature, introduced by State Senator Michael Gianaris, would waive rent and mortgage payments for three months.

Cuomo would have to sign off on the bill, which some observers, including those in the tenants’ rights movement, question whether he would do and if it could withstand a legal challenge in court. On the other side, representatives of landlords are telling state lawmakers that the financial burden cannot be simply transferred from renters to property owners. They want their own financial help, too.

So far, the financial relief for renters under consideration in Albany is the most sweeping and generous package of potential aid in any state, and it reflects the newfound clout of tenants in a legislature long dominated by the powerful real estate industry. The proposed legislation has positioned New York as a leader across the country — though lawmakers in California and Washington State are not far behind in proposing similar assistance.



On Politics is also available as a newsletter. Sign up here to get it delivered to your inbox.

Is there anything you think we’re missing? Anything you want to see more of? We’d love to hear from you. Email us at onpolitics@nytimes.com.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — As the toll of the coronavirus continues to rise — with more state shutdowns, extensive new layoffs and overwhelmed hospitals — lawmakers and administration officials are turning their focus to what more is needed to counter the pandemic and protect a battered economy.

President Trump, in a stark change of tone, told Americans on Monday that the peak of fatalities from Covid-19 will not arrive for two more weeks, pleading with the public to continue social distancing in order to get through “a very vital 30 days” that would be a time of national challenge.

“This is our shared patriotic duty,” he said at a news conference in the White House Rose Garden. “We’re sort of putting it all on the line, this 30 days — so important because we have to get back. But the more we dedicate ourselves today, the more quickly we will emerge on the other side of the crisis, and that’s the time we’re waiting for.”

Officials are beginning to outline elements of another government relief package to add to the federal response, only days after Mr. Trump signed into law a $2 trillion economic stimulus, the largest in American history.

“We have a list of issues that are immediate — that have a short fuse,” said Speaker Nancy Pelosi, in a nearly 40-minute telephone interview on Monday from her office in the Capitol. She ticked off a list of Democratic priorities, including increased protections and equipment for workers on the front lines of the coronavirus, expanded paid leave, a major new infrastructure investment and additional funds for state and local governments.

“This isn’t about how fast we can do it,” she added. “It’s how fast we must do it.”

It is not clear how quickly such a bill could materialize — Republican leaders and Steven Mnuchin, the Treasury secretary, have said they are not yet certain that more help would be needed, or when — but in outlining her plans on Monday, Ms. Pelosi made it clear that the path to any further government assistance would run through her office, and that Democrats would press for another large package sooner rather than later.

By Monday afternoon, more than half of the 50 states were under a directive to remain at home, meaning that roughly three out of four Americans are or will soon be asked to avoid leaving their homes as part of a broad effort to stall the spread of the virus.

Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the United States’ leading infectious disease expert, said that the country as a whole would see the death toll rise. “I wouldn’t be surprised if we saw over 100,000 deaths,” he said.

The Comfort, a Navy hospital ship, docked in Manhattan on Monday to provide relief to New York’s overwhelmed hospitals and to help treat patients who do not have the coronavirus. And even with billions of dollars in funds being allocated to both states and hospitals, officials say more will probably be needed as the virus continues to spread and portions of the economy continue to shutter.

More than 66,500 cases had been identified in New York State by Monday, with the death toll surpassing 1,200, by far the most of any state.

Arizona, Virginia and Maryland, as well as the District of Columbia, issued new orders on Monday for residents to stay home. And in Florida, Gov. Ron DeSantis, a Republican who had resisted a statewide edict, said that he would sign a directive codifying a patchwork of local rules urging residents in the densely populated southeast corner of the state — including Miami-Dade, Broward, Palm Beach and Monroe Counties — to stay home.

Even as Mr. Trump suggested that his administration was allowing governors to do “pretty much what they want, with our supervision,” Dr. Deborah L. Birx, the White House coronavirus response coordinator, said every governor and mayor should carry out new, longer-term distancing guidelines put in place on Sunday.

“When you look at all of the states together, all of them are moving at exactly the same curve,” she said. “And that’s why we really believe this needs to be federal guidance, so that every state understands that it may look like two cases today that becomes 20, that become 200, that become 2,000 — and that’s what we’re trying to prevent.”

Mr. Trump continued to clash behind the scenes with governors over the availability of testing, suggesting on a private call that a chronic lack of kits to test people for Covid-19 is no longer a problem even as some of them insisted that they still lacked the supplies they needed.

Across the country, companies — including several major retailers — announced huge layoffs. Macy’s, which had 125,000 employees at the end of last year, said on Monday that it would furlough most of them after having lost “the majority” of its sales because of store closures. L Brands, which owns Victoria’s Secret and Bath & Body Works, also said it would furlough most store staff, and Gap said on Monday it would furlough nearly 80,000 store employees in the United States and Canada.

In Washington, Ms. Pelosi and other officials involved in previous negotiations have acknowledged that it is unlikely that any legislation to address the crisis would be ready for a floor vote before mid-April, with both the House and Senate in recess and not scheduled to return to Capitol Hill until April 20.

Some officials involved in the talks, including Representative Kevin McCarthy of California, the minority leader, have suggested there may be no need for another round of government relief. Mr. Mnuchin, who had previously said he expected a second round of direct payments to Americans would be needed, also said on Sunday that he hoped it would not be.

In less than four weeks, Congress has approved and Mr. Trump has signed into law three bills totaling more than $2 trillion worth of government aid, including a significant expansion of the social safety net and a $500 billion bailout for distressed companies — a stunning outpouring of federal resources that is only beginning to be put into effect across the country.

But even before the stimulus measure was complete, Ms. Pelosi had begun laying the groundwork for a far-reaching fourth measure, including at a ceremony right after the legislation passed the House.

“What I’m going to do is call you guys and see what suggestions you have for Phase 4 because we should start writing it right now,” Ms. Pelosi could be overheard telling Representative Richard E. Neal, Democrat of Massachusetts and the chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, Representative Nydia M. Velázquez, Democrat of New York and the chairwoman of the House Small Business Committee, and Representative Maxine Waters, Democrat of California and the chairwoman of the Financial Services Committee. Ms. Pelosi listed a number of items, including “direct payments” and “more hospital funds.”

“We’re going to need more cash in the system,” Mr. Neal said in response, while Ms. Waters assured Ms. Pelosi: “We’ll give it our best shot.”

In an interview, Mr. Neal said a major new plan to build roads and bridges should be part of such a bill.

“It’s time to take on the infrastructure issue,” he said. “You treat that as an economic investment.”

Any such measure would also have to pass the Senate, where majority Republicans have pushed back on many of Democrats’ highest priorities, seeking to pare back paid leave and jobless aid.

In the interview on Monday, Ms. Pelosi emphasized the need to secure more equipment for health workers on the front lines, known as personal protective equipment, and ventilators for hospitals. She said Democrats would most likely revisit a push to bolster pensions and medical leave provisions, and would work to ensure that other aspects of treatment for the coronavirus, beyond the initial test, would be covered by the government.

She also said she would like to see more measures aimed at getting money directly into the hands of individuals and families, including a possible retroactive rollback of the limit on the state and local tax deduction, a change that hurt high earners in states like New York and California.

“They’d have more disposable income, which is the lifeblood of our economy, a consumer economy that we are,” Ms. Pelosi said.

A fourth package could offer an opportunity for negotiators to revisit a number of provisions that were either left out altogether or prompted last-minute consternation among lawmakers, including lingering concerns among Democrats over strict oversight requirements they demanded for the $500 billion corporate bailout fund.

The Council of the Inspectors General on Integrity and Efficiency announced on Monday that Glenn A. Fine, the acting inspector general at the Defense Department, would oversee the Pandemic Response Accountability Committee, which is responsible for oversight of all of the funds allocated in the legislation approved so far.

In a signing statement on Friday, Mr. Trump suggested he had the power to decide what information a newly created inspector general intended to monitor the bailout money could share with Congress — in effect ignoring some of the oversight conditions.

But Ms. Pelosi made it clear that if the administration did not honor the conditions, it would receive no cooperation from Congress on future legislation to deal with the pandemic.

“We have passed legislation with conditions in it,” Ms. Pelosi said. “I believe they understand that it isn’t the last bill that will ever be passed, and if they expect any future cooperation on anything else, that they should honor this bill.”

Still, she said that Mr. Trump’s tendency to undercut what other members of his team agree to in complicated negotiations made it more difficult to hammer out the kind of relief plans that are needed in a crisis.

In her past talks with Republican administrations, she said, “We have a true negotiation, not, ‘I’m going to run back and ask Daddy — what I can do about this?’”

“That’s unfortunately the situation that Mnuchin was in,” she said. “But, again, he’s the person they want us to chat with. That’s who we’ll talk with.”

Alan Rappeport, Jim Tankersley and Jonathan Martin contributed reporting.

<|endoftext|>

Updated March 30, 2020: This story has been changed to reflect the first known positive coronavirus test of a Liberty University student. 

LYNCHBURG, Va. — As Liberty University’s spring break was drawing to a close this month, Jerry Falwell Jr., its president, spoke with the physician who runs Liberty’s student health service about the rampaging coronavirus.

“We’ve lost the ability to corral this thing,” Dr. Thomas W. Eppes Jr. said he told Mr. Falwell. But he did not urge him to close the school. “I just am not going to be so presumptuous as to say, ‘This is what you should do and this is what you shouldn’t do,’” Dr. Eppes said in an interview.

So Mr. Falwell — a staunch ally of President Trump and an influential voice in the evangelical world — reopened the university last week, igniting a firestorm. As of Friday, Dr. Eppes said, nearly a dozen Liberty students were sick with symptoms that suggested Covid-19, the disease caused by the virus. Three were referred to local hospital centers for testing. An additional eight were told to self-isolate.

As of 8 p.m. on March 29, of those three students tested, one was positive, one was negative and one student’s results are still pending, according to Dr. Eppes, who added that the student who tested positive for Covid-19 lives off campus. 

“Liberty will be notifying the community as deemed appropriate and required by law,” Mr. Falwell said in an interview on Sunday when confronted with the numbers. He added that any student now returning to campus would be required to self-quarantine for 14 days.

“I can’t be sure what’s going on with individuals who are not being tested but who are advised to self-isolate,” said Kerry Gateley, the health director of the Central Virginia Health District, which covers Lynchburg. “I would assume that if clinicians were concerned enough about the possibility of Covid-19 disease to urge self-isolation that appropriate screening and testing would be arranged.”

After initial publication of this article, the university said it had asked four students who returned from the New York area and two of their roommates to self-quarantine, but none of them were referred for testing and none had symptoms. One student who returned from a county with a high number of cases was running a fever and had a cough. He was tested and elected to go home pending the results rather than self-isolate, the university said.

Of the 1,900 students who initially returned last week to campus, Mr. Falwell said more than 800 had left. But he said he had “no idea” how many students had returned to off-campus housing.

“If I were them, I’d be more nervous,” he added, because they live in more crowded conditions.

For critical weeks in January and February, the nation’s far right dismissed the seriousness of the pandemic. Mr. Falwell derided it as an “overreaction” driven by liberal desires to damage Mr. Trump.

Though the current crisis would appear epidemiological in nature, Dr. Eppes said he saw it as a reflection of “the political divide.”

“If Liberty sneezes, there are people who don’t like the fact that Liberty sneezed,” he said in an interview. “Mr. Falwell called me to listen to a view that wasn’t exactly his. Great leaders do that type of thing.”

The city of Lynchburg is furious.

“We had a firestorm of our own citizens who said, ‘What’s going on?’” said Treney Tweedy, the mayor.

Some Liberty officials accuse alarmed outsiders of playing politics. Ms. Tweedy has called Mr. Falwell “reckless.” And within the school, there are signs of panic.

“I’m not allowed to talk to you because I’m an employee here,” one student on campus wrote in an email. But, he pleaded, “we need help to go home.”

Under the Falwell family’s leadership, Liberty University has grown in five decades from a modest Baptist college to an evangelical powerhouse with cash investments and endowments of nearly $2 billion, nearly 46,000 undergraduates and a campus that sprawls across Lynchburg and neighboring counties in Virginia. Total enrollment, including online students, exceeds 100,000.

The institution is a welcome and generous presence in this Blue Ridge Mountain region, where the percentage of Lynchburg residents living in poverty is twice the state average. Liberty and its Thomas Road Baptist Church donate goods and services, its medical students conduct free health screenings, and its students participate in city beautification, maintenance and charity projects.

The university was founded by Mr. Falwell’s famous father as a bastion of social conservatism, one that was unabashedly combative as it trained what it called “Champions for Christ.” If anything, the younger Mr. Falwell has made it more so since his father’s death.

The mayor and city manager here, Bonnie Svrcek, felt relieved two weeks ago, when Mr. Falwell assured them that he fully intended to comply with Virginia’s public health directives and close the school to virtually all students, most of whom were scattering for spring break. Then he changed his mind.

“We think it’s irresponsible for so many universities to just say ‘closed, you can’t come back,’ push the problem off on other communities and sit there in their ivory towers,” Mr. Falwell said on Wednesday on a radio show hosted by Todd Starnes, a far-right conspiracy theorist.

“We’re conservative, we’re Christian, and therefore we’re being attacked,” he said.

College and the coronavirus.

Michael Gillette, a former mayor of Lynchburg and a bioethicist now working with its hospitals on rationing scarce ventilators, disagrees.

“To argue that criticism of Liberty is based on political bias is unfounded and unreasonable,” he said. “Liberty just did not take this threat as seriously as others have.”

Gov. Ralph Northam of Virginia, Lynchburg city officials and a growing number of Liberty students, parents and employees have urged Mr. Falwell to reverse course, but such pleas have only prompted a stream of often conflicting statements.

“Our messages did change throughout the week as the governor’s orders changed,” Mr. Falwell said. “We had to adapt.”

Mr. Falwell initially said only international students or those with nowhere else to go would remain. Then he welcomed back a much larger group of about 1,900 students to campus housing last week, in addition to faculty members and staff. Others returned to off-campus rentals in Lynchburg.

Students who remained at home had to return last week to clean out their rooms, a requirement that was later relaxed. Faculty members were at first ordered back to campus, even though they would be teaching online. Then some were allowed to work from home.

Mr. Falwell also waffled on whether the school would issue refunds to students who did not return for the semester, before announcing on Friday that most would receive a $1,000 credit for next year’s bills.

Mr. Falwell and his administration have worked to tamp down dissent. After a Liberty undergraduate, Calum Best, wrote on his personal Facebook page that students should receive refunds, he said Liberty’s spokesman, Scott Lamb, called his cellphone to berate him. Asked about the call, Mr. Lamb said he was simply objecting to an error in the post, and Mr. Best was “spinning.”

Updated Dec. 18, 2020

The latest on how the pandemic is reshaping education.

After Marybeth Davis Baggett, a professor, wrote an open letter asking the university’s board of trustees to close the campus, Mr. Falwell mocked her on Twitter as “the ‘Baggett’ lady.”

Jeff Brittain, a Liberty parent, wrote on Twitter: “I’m as right wing as they get, bud. But as a parent of three of your students, I think this is crazy, irresponsible and seems like a money grab.” Mr. Falwell replied, calling him a “dummy.”

All of this has left even his critics scratching their heads.

“It’s honestly hard to figure out what his motives are,” Mr. Best, the student who wrote the Facebook post, said in an interview. “If he had purely political motives, he’s being way more conservative than even Trump is being right now. Trump is at least allowing doctors to say their piece. Jerry is not. It kind of shocks me at this point.”

On campus, the administration says it is adhering to Virginia’s public health mandates, but students are flouting them. While security guards appear to be enforcing state advisories requiring a six-foot distance from others and gatherings of no more than 10 people, students are still assembling in closer proximity to eat, play sports, study and use dormitory restrooms. Decals slapped on furniture that say “Closed for Social Distancing” have wound up on laptops and car bumpers. Study tables are farther apart, but shared computer terminals remain. While some students are trying to adhere to social distancing guidelines, they live in group houses, pile onto city buses and crowd the few businesses that remain open in Lynchburg.

It was not supposed to be that way. As the number of reported cases of the coronavirus in Virginia began rising, Ms. Tweedy said Mr. Falwell personally assured her that the school would not fully reopen. “We have some students who cannot go anywhere or they have nowhere to go,” she recalled his telling her. “The number on that day was 300 or so students, and even if it was a few more, we said, ‘OK, well, thank you.’”

But as spring break drew to a close in mid-March, all Liberty students were encouraged to return.

“We never discussed numbers, and I never told them the dorms would be closed,” Mr. Falwell said on Sunday. “We’re going to have to agree to disagree on what was said.”

Mr. Falwell runs Liberty his own way, and his word is law. Professors are not tenured and can be fired at will. The administration controls the student newspaper.

Mr. Falwell echoes Mr. Trump’s talking points on the coronavirus, which he often calls the “flu.”

“It’s just strange to me how many are overreacting” to the pandemic, Mr. Falwell said on “Fox & Friends” on March 10. “It makes you wonder if there is a political reason for that. Impeachment didn’t work and the Mueller report didn’t work and Article 25 didn’t work, and so maybe now this is their next attempt to get Trump.”

Lynchburg is particularly ill-prepared to become a hot spot. Hospitals in the region have a total of 1,174 beds, only 55 of them intensive care, according to a recent analysis by the Harvard Global Health Institute. Those must serve 217,000 adults, nearly 50,000 of whom are 65 or older. Tests for the coronavirus remain in short supply.

Mr. Falwell has played down the dangers of his decision in interviews with the news media, where he has even suggested that the coronavirus is a North Korean bioweapon. On Fox News, he blithely asserted that the cure rate for Covid-19 “is 99.7 percent for people under 50,” adding, “We have talked to medical professionals, numerous medical professionals, before we made this decision.”

An archived version of Liberty’s website said those medical professionals included the school’s own public health faculty and campus health providers, as well as “Dr. Jeffrey Hyman of Northwell Health, New York’s largest health care provider.”

When contacted by The New York Times, Northwell Health denied that Dr. Hyman provided any formal guidance to Liberty, adding that he is not an infectious disease specialist. In a statement, the hospital system said that Dr. Hyman was a personal friend of the Falwell family, who told them in private conversation “that reconvening classes would be a ‘bad idea.’”

Kristin Hussey contributed reporting. Kitty Bennett contributed research.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — The Navy removed the captain of the stricken aircraft carrier Theodore Roosevelt on Thursday, only days after he implored his superior officers for more help as a coronavirus outbreak spread aboard the ship.

In a letter that leaked to news organizations on Tuesday, Capt. Brett E. Crozier laid out the dire situation unfolding on the warship, with almost 5,000 crew members, and described what he said were the Navy’s failures to provide the proper resources to combat the virus by moving sailors off the vessel and disinfecting areas on board.

About 114 sailors have been infected so far, a number that is expected to rise by hundreds as the vessel remains docked at Guam.

Senior Defense Department officials were angry that the letter found its way first to The San Francisco Chronicle, and then to other news outlets, where it was widely reported.

Thomas B. Modly, the acting Navy secretary, said Captain Crozier was fired because the growing coronavirus outbreak “overwhelmed his ability to act professionally.” The leadership issue, Mr. Modly noted, was that Captain Crozier did not go through the military’s formal chain of command, but sent the letter on an unclassified email system to 20 to 30 people.

The letter created a panic on the ship and among the crew’s families when it was made public, Mr. Modly said. He noted that there was no evidence that Captain Crozier leaked the message.

“In sending it out pretty broadly, he did not take care to ensure that it couldn’t be leaked,” Mr. Modly said. “And that’s part of his responsibility.”

The captain demonstrated “extremely poor judgment” by not taking his concerns directly to his immediate superior, an admiral also aboard the Roosevelt, even though the Navy’s Seventh Fleet in Japan was sending medical supplies to the ship, Mr. Modly said.

“It raised alarm bells unnecessarily,” Mr. Modly said.

Mr. Modly said he made the decision on his own with no pressure from Defense Secretary Mark T. Esper or the White House.

But from the start of the crisis, Mr. Esper has warned his commanders not to make decisions related to the coronavirus that might surprise the White House or run afoul of President Trump’s messaging on the growing health challenge. And he has emphasized maintaining military readiness to conduct all missions even while protecting the force from infection.

The Navy tried to frame the decision to remove Captain Crozier as one about loss of confidence, and not retribution for the letter. But in firing a captain who complained that the Navy was not doing enough to stop the spread of coronavirus, the Navy opened itself to criticism that it was insufficiently concerned about the health of its sailors.

Mr. Modly stressed that he welcomed blunt assessments from subordinate officers, but the removal of Captain Crozier could have a chilling effect, a point made by members of Congress.

Lawmakers reacted angrily, and some reached out to Pentagon officials to urge them to reconsider removing the captain from his post, people familiar with the conversations said.

“I learned on my first day in the Marines that having the courage to speak truth to power is grounds for respect not grounds for relief,” Representative Seth Moulton, Democrat of Massachusetts and a former Marine, wrote Thursday afternoon on Twitter. “This is far from the first time in the last several years that Congress is going to have a lot of questions for Navy leadership — on leadership.”

Representative Adam Smith of Washington, the chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, along with top subcommittee leaders — Representatives Joe Courtney of Connecticut, Jackie Speier of California and John Garamendi of California — condemned the move, although they acknowledged that Captain Crozier might have made missteps in his handling of the situation.

“Captain Crozier was justifiably concerned about the health and safety of his crew, but he did not handle the immense pressure appropriately,” the lawmakers said. “However, relieving him of his command is an overreaction.”

“Throwing the commanding officer overboard without a thorough investigation is not going to solve the growing crisis aboard the U.S.S. Theodore Roosevelt,” the lawmakers added. “What’s more, we are very concerned about the chilling effect this dismissal will have on commanders throughout the Department of Defense. Dismissing a commanding officer for speaking out on issues critical to the safety of those under their command discourages others from raising similar concerns.”

At least one lawmaker on the House Armed Services Committee, Representative Andy Kim, Democrat of New Jersey, called for Captain Crozier’s reinstatement, saying that “dismissing him sends a dangerous message to our leaders across the military.”

Captain Crozier also had come under some internal criticism from Defense Department officials who said he should not have allowed sailors to go ashore last month in Da Nang, Vietnam.

But other Navy officials defended that decision, saying that, at the time, most of the coronavirus cases in Vietnam were in the north of the country, far from where the Roosevelt made its port call.

On Wednesday, Adm. Michael Gilday, the chief of naval operations, called the stop in Vietnam, where the virus may have been transmitted to those aboard the ship, a “risk-informed decision.”

“At the time, there were about 15 or 16 cases, they were up north in Hanoi and the ship pulled into Da Nang,” Admiral Gilday said. “Today, there are 203 cases in Vietnam and no deaths.”

Navy officials also said the virus might have come aboard not in Vietnam but as Navy personnel boarded the carrier while it was underway.

Standing alongside Admiral Gilday, Mr. Modly told reporters on Wednesday that he welcomed the captain’s decision to express his concerns — but that the captain would be punished if he were responsible for leaking the letter to the news media.

“I don’t know who leaked the letter to the media,” Mr. Modly said. “That would be something that would violate the principles of good order and discipline if he were responsible for that.”

On Thursday, Mr. Modly announced that he had lost confidence in Captain Crozier and was removing him from his post.

<|endoftext|>

Good morning and welcome to On Politics, a daily political analysis of the 2020 elections based on reporting by New York Times journalists.

Sign up here to get On Politics in your inbox every weekday.

Unemployment is skyrocketing, with some experts’ projections surpassing the worst numbers of the Great Depression. And for the first time, lawmakers in Washington are talking seriously about responding with a government jobs program, along the lines of what President Franklin Roosevelt enacted in the 1930s. House Democrats on Wednesday unveiled a $760 billion proposal, billed as the “Moving Forward Framework,” to create jobs through a national infrastructure program. There was increasingly bipartisan agreement that the $2 trillion stimulus enacted last week could prove insufficient as the effects of the coronavirus ripple outward for months — and possibly into next year.

Mitch McConnell, the Senate majority leader, warned this week that he didn’t want Democrats to use the crisis to pass “unrelated policy items.” In any case, it’s unlikely that Speaker Nancy Pelosi could persuade a Republican-led Senate to follow her lead on crafting a law of this magnitude. Instead, this bill (and any others like it that Democrats pass in the House) may be fairly symbolic: a token that signals Democrats are serious about creating a jobs program. On Tuesday President Trump backed the idea, saying on Twitter that an infrastructure bill “should be VERY BIG & BOLD, Two Trillion Dollars, and be focused solely on jobs and rebuilding the once great infrastructure of our Country!” Of course, Trump has often talked about infrastructure spending, and spoke for years about instituting an “infrastructure week” to discuss the issue in Washington, but it came to no end.

With the national stockpile of medical supplies nearly depleted, Trump urged state governments to “make a deal” with commercial manufacturers and persuade them to produce more medical supplies. He has been reluctant to broadly use the federal Defense Production Act to compel companies to make supplies, even though the law has been invoked hundreds of thousands of times during his presidency. Later, when asked why he hadn’t issued a national stay-at-home order, Trump said he preferred to leave that to the states, as well. “We’re really here to help governors,” he said. “They’re the front line of attack.”

Until yesterday, Florida’s Ron DeSantis was the most prominent governor of a hard-hit state who had still not issued a shelter-in-place order. That was despite the high number of older people who lived in the state. When DeSantis, a Republican, took that step yesterday — after a phone call with Trump, his political mentor — his mandate contained exceptions for religious gatherings, something many other states didn’t offer. In recent weeks, DeSantis has emerged as a kind of Trump-friendly foil to Andrew Cuomo, the governor of New York and the most prominent face of Democratic efforts to fight the virus. While Cuomo has focused on restricting residents’ movement within his state, DeSantis has concentrated more on barring out-of-state visitors. But even as other states have struggled to gain access to resources in the federal stockpile, The Washington Post recently found that Florida, Trump’s adopted home state, had received all of the medical supplies it had requested.

Trump told reporters he would “absolutely” be willing to take a call from Joe Biden, should the Democratic presidential candidate have advice to offer. Biden has repeatedly invoked his experience helping to fight the spread of Ebola and swine flu in the Obama administration. After the White House adviser Kellyanne Conway challenged Biden to “call the White House today and offer some support,” Biden’s campaign issued a statement on Wednesday saying, basically, sure. At his daily news conference, Trump effectively said the same — if not exactly with enthusiasm. What are the chances this back-and-forth actually leads to a productive phone call? Let’s just say it’s uncertain.

President Trump reading his notes at Wednesday’s coronavirus briefing at the White House.

By Katie Glueck

Biden served as President Barack Obama’s vice president for eight years — and as he moves closer to landing the Democratic presidential nomination himself, he is giving real thought to his own potential running mate, which he has said will be a woman.

It’s a subject on which his allies have strong — and sharply divergent — opinions, according to interviews with nearly two dozen Biden donors and other supporters. Some argued that Biden, if he wins the nomination, should prioritize selecting a woman of color as his running mate. Others said that regional considerations, like ties to the industrial Midwest, should hold greater weight. 

Biden has indicated that he’ll consider a long list of contenders, including former rivals like Kamala Harris, Elizabeth Warren and Amy Klobuchar, all of whom are senators — as well as governors like Gretchen Whitmer of Michigan. Other possible contenders often mentioned by allies include two Latina leaders from the West: Catherine Cortez Masto, a senator from Nevada, and Michelle Lujan Grisham, the governor of New Mexico. Stacey Abrams, the 2018 candidate for governor in Georgia, is frequently floated, too.

One complication in all of this is the uncertain status of the Democratic National Convention — it is scheduled for July, but Biden urged late Wednesday for it to be pushed back to August.

Here is what’s clear: Biden takes the subject of a running mate very seriously — and he and his team are preparing to accelerate the process.



On Politics is also available as a newsletter. Sign up here to get it delivered to your inbox.

Is there anything you think we’re missing? Anything you want to see more of? We’d love to hear from you. Email us at onpolitics@nytimes.com.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — As he confronts a pandemic, President Trump’s attention has also been directed at a more familiar foe: those he feels are challenging him, and particularly women.

“Always a mess with Mary B.,” Mr. Trump tweeted last week, attacking the female chief executive of General Motors, Mary T. Barra, as he accused the company of dragging its feet on producing ventilators. “As usual with ‘this’ General Motors, things just never seem to work out,” he wrote, “this” G.M. apparently referring to the one led by the first female chief executive of an American auto manufacturer.

At least he mentioned Ms. Barra by name. When it came to Gretchen Whitmer, Michigan’s Democratic governor, who delivered her party’s official response to his State of the Union address earlier this year and has been pushing for a national emergency declaration in her state, Mr. Trump did not acknowledge her by name.

“We’ve had a big problem with the young, a woman governor,” he said in an interview last week with Sean Hannity, the Fox News host. “You know who I’m talking about, from Michigan.” The president dismissed Ms. Whitmer, who has been pressing the federal government to provide more medical equipment to her state, noting that she was a new governor and it had “not been pleasant.”

In a tweet, he later referred to her as “Gretchen ‘Half’ Whitmer,” saying “she doesn’t have a clue.”

Ms. Whitmer, whom White House officials have privately criticized for showing her inexperience on the group conference calls with the president, has been relatively measured in her public criticisms of Mr. Trump.

In interviews, she said Michigan was not receiving “clear directives and guidance” from Washington, and that the federal government told her that if the state needed supplies, “we needed to go it ourselves.” On the calls, officials said, she has been corrected by Seema Verma, the administrator of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, about what waivers she had already been granted by the federal government.

At his news conference on Friday, Mr. Trump said he had directed Vice President Mike Pence to cut off communication with Ms. Whitmer, again without using her name. He said he told Mr. Pence, “‘Don’t call the woman in Michigan,’” Mr. Trump said at his news conference. “I say, if they don’t treat you right, don’t call.”

But Tiffany Brown, Ms. Whitmer’s spokeswoman, said the governor was committed to maintaining a functional relationship with the federal government — even if that no longer included Mr. Trump. “Governor Whitmer has and will continue to have conversations with the Vice President and the head of FEMA,” Ms. Brown said in a statement.

As Mr. Trump has had to reverse himself on his overly upbeat assessments of how quickly he could reopen the country for business, he has also increasingly targeted some of his regular foils.

On Monday morning, in an interview with “Fox & Friends,” he referred to Speaker Nancy Pelosi as a “sick puppy” after she had appeared on CNN’s “State of the Union” and said the president’s early denials about the dangers of the coronavirus carried “deadly” consequences.

“As the president fiddles, people are dying,” Ms. Pelosi said.

In an interview on Monday, she rolled her eyes at his attack. “Every knock from him is a boost for me, quite frankly, so I don’t care what he says,” she said.

And at his Sunday evening news conference, Mr. Trump snapped at Yamiche Alcindor, a PBS NewsHour correspondent whom he has criticized publicly in the past, for asking him to defend his own statements about governors making requests for medical equipment like ventilators that he believes they do not actually need.

“Let me tell you something,” Mr. Trump said, after denying he made statements that he had, in fact, made. “Be nice. Don’t be threatening. Don’t be threatening. Be nice.”

Ms. Alcindor tweeted in response that she was “not the first human being, woman, black person or journalist to be told that while doing a job.”

It was a sentiment echoed by Democrats, who said Mr. Trump’s pattern of singling out women for critiques ultimately takes a toll on him politically with female voters, even as it energizes some members of his base.

“Women see this and they’ve all been on the receiving end at some point in their lives,” said Cecile Richards, the former president of Planned Parenthood and a founder of Supermajority, a new women’s advocacy group. “When you actually poll women who did vote for him, they did it with enormous hesitation because of his bullying attitude towards women and his vulgar attitudes.”

Women who work for Mr. Trump have long defended the president’s treatment of women by noting that he is an equal opportunity counterpuncher, someone whose gut reaction to being insulted by anyone is to respond in kind. And the women closest to him, like his daughter Ivanka Trump or his former campaign manager Kellyanne Conway, now the White House counselor, have often pointed to their own experiences when pressed on Mr. Trump’s history of sexist attacks.

“I speak for many women who have and do work for him,” Ms. Conway said on Monday. “We are on equal footing with our male colleagues, even though some of those male colleagues have not always agreed. I feel empowered, respected and engaged.”

As for Mr. Trump’s recent attacks on women, Ms. Conway said the president responded when under attack “without regard to the immutable characteristics that seem to obsess so many who should otherwise put their full force and energy into Covid-19.”

Stephanie Grisham, the White House press secretary, added that “women rightfully fought for equal treatment for years, and there should not be special rules applied to what constitutes equal treatment.” She noted that she found it “funny how I never get these inquiries from men.”

In fact, the insults are hardly specific to gender. In the briefing room earlier this month, the president also pounced on Peter Alexander, a correspondent for NBC News, calling him a “terrible reporter,” and accusing him of asking a “nasty question” when Mr. Alexander asked the president to deliver his message to a fearful country. He has described Gov. Jay Inslee of Washington as a “nasty person” and a “snake” for criticizing the administration’s response to the virus.

But his attacks on women even as the country together faces a pandemic have stood out, in part because they recall his dismissal of his 2016 Democratic rival, Hillary Clinton, as a “nasty woman,” and of many powerful women who have challenged him since.

“They’re all appalling,” Jess McIntosh, a Democratic strategist, said of Mr. Trump’s personal attacks on men and women alike. “The difference is that it’s easier to name the women he doesn’t attack. And the attacks become much faster and meaner when he himself is facing some kind of pressure and he lashes out at who he perceives to be the weakest person in the room.”

<|endoftext|>

Hi. Welcome to On Politics, your guide to the day in national politics. I’m Lisa Lerer, your host.

Sign up here to get On Politics in your inbox every weekday.

We’ve talked about the recent rise in President Trump’s approval ratings. But over the weekend, a Washington Post/ABC News poll showed another measure of political strength for the president that’s probably worth your attention.

Enthusiasm.

Simply put, Republicans are more excited to vote for Mr. Trump than Democrats are for Joe Biden, their likely nominee.

According to the Post/ABC survey, 55 percent of registered voters who back Mr. Trump say they are very enthusiastic about supporting him, and 32 percent say they are somewhat enthusiastic. Among Mr. Biden’s supporters, just 28 percent say they are very enthusiastic, while 46 percent are somewhat enthusiastic.

Overall, there’s a 12-point enthusiasm gap between Mr. Trump and Mr. Biden. Among the most excited voters, it’s an even bigger 27-point gap.

Pollsters, strategists and political types pay a lot of attention to the intensity of enthusiasm because it offers hints about who is likely to show up at the polls and who is likely to stay home. (We’re assuming “showing up at the polls” will still be a thing in November.) Campaigning in this polarized era is often less about persuading undecided voters and more about driving out your forces.

Here’s The Post on the history:

In May 2012, Mitt Romney, now a U.S. senator, had a strong enthusiasm deficit of 25 points against President Barack Obama in Post-ABC polling. In June 2008, Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.) was down 33 points on enthusiasm against Obama. In June 2004, Sen. John F. Kerry (D-Mass.) faced a 16-point gap on enthusiasm in his campaign to unseat President George W. Bush. Romney, McCain and Kerry all managed to narrow that gap by November but ultimately lost their elections.

For much of this election cycle, both parties have been fairly energized. While Republicans have appeared slightly more enthusiastic in polling, Democratic turnout surged on Super Tuesday at the beginning of March, with record numbers of voters coming out to vote in the primaries.

So what’s happened over the past month? Oh, just this tiny, life-changing national crisis called the coronavirus.

Mr. Trump’s news briefings have become a ratings hit, while Mr. Biden is relegated to news media interviews, grainy virtual events and conference calls with experts from his house in Delaware. Mr. Trump’s backers have relished seeing him take a leadership role in the crisis.

But other voters are starting to pay less attention to the election entirely, as the campaign has entered a kind of coronavirus deep freeze. That’s a sentiment I heard from a number of people I spoke with this past weekend.

“It was all about election, election, election, but now it’s all about Covid-19,” Hannah Soule, a photographer in New York, told me. “I don’t know who I’ll support. It’s not something I’m thinking about in the moment. Right now, we’re just trying to survive.”

Despite the frozen state of the race, the new enthusiasm numbers show that Mr. Biden needs to work quickly to shore up support, particularly among younger and more liberal voters who have backed Senator Bernie Sanders. Courting them is complicated by the fact that Mr. Sanders remains in the race, though Mr. Biden is trying with virtual happy hour events aimed at young voters and policy plans targeting liberals.

It’s also difficult to be running for president while lacking the power to actually do anything, a situation that some Democrats fear could make Mr. Biden seem more like a distraction than a leader. A governor — like Andrew Cuomo of New York, whom some Democrats wistfully hope to draft into the presidential race — can demand supplies and issue executive orders.

Mr. Biden, well, he’s stuck on the sidelines, spending time on the phone consulting with medical experts and governors.

“Everything that I have done has been designed to be constructive,” he said, when asked during an interview on MSNBC today about whether he’s been visible enough during the past month.

But clearly the questioned rankled him: “Well, thanks for giving me the time. So they don’t wonder where I am,” he said, signing off.

Our colleague Matt Flegenheimer just published an article about Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s growing fan base, so he answered a couple of questions from our On Politics readers.

Is it too late to get Cuomo into the presidential race? Or would he run? Can’t help but be reminded that your comments about Joe’s fans’ “lack of passion” is exactly what Bernie said.

— Dudley Gilmer, Banner Elk, N.C.

I’m afraid any “Draft Cuomo” activists are likely to be disappointed, Dudley. The primary is both well underway and effectively stalled, with Joe Biden (whom Mr. Cuomo endorsed enthusiastically) holding a commanding delegate lead over Bernie Sanders. For all the affection he’s earned during the coronavirus outbreak, Mr. Cuomo is still a noncandidate with an escalating crisis on his hands. And for all the elaborate contested convention scenarios tossed around earlier this year, this one is almost certainly prohibitively far-fetched.

Any chance you could respond to the idea (notably crazy for these crazy times) that Biden and Bernie would agree to pledge their delegates to Gov. Andrew Cuomo, who is demonstrating himself to be the most presidential of any elected official?

— Eduardo Duarte, Portland, Maine

Doesn’t sound like a deal that Mr. Biden or Mr. Sanders would find agreeable! While Mr. Biden especially has praised Mr. Cuomo, a friend of his, for his leadership during the crisis, there is no indication that either existing candidate — still standing in a field that once included more than 20 contenders — has much interest in stepping aside to accommodate someone new. Especially when that someone new is quite busy.

Drop us a line!

We want to hear from our readers. Have a question? We’ll try to answer it. Have a comment? We’re all ears. Email us at onpolitics@nytimes.com.

Be like Elmo!

Sesame Street has updated its classic tune, “Brushy Brush,” for the coronavirus age. It’s part of four new animated public service spots reminding young viewers to stay healthy during the pandemic.

Thanks for reading. On Politics is your guide to the political news cycle, delivering clarity from the chaos.

On Politics is also available as a newsletter. Sign up here to get it delivered to your inbox.

Is there anything you think we’re missing? Anything you want to see more of? We’d love to hear from you. Email us at onpolitics@nytimes.com.

<|endoftext|>

LOS ANGELES — One is a top-ranked research hospital in West Los Angeles, with buildings named after Steven Spielberg and Barbra Streisand. Its hallways are hung with works by Picasso, Miro and Warhol, part of a 4,000-piece collection of donated art. Hollywood celebrities and royalty vie to recover in its first-come, first-served luxury suites.

The other is a community hospital in South Los Angeles, surrounded by fast-food chains, liquor stores and discount shops. It, too, is a state-of-the-art institution, albeit one with far more limited resources, serving one of Los Angeles’s most vulnerable communities, home to the working poor and the uninsured as well as homeless tent encampments, where a significant portion of the population has underlying chronic health conditions.

But the coronavirus pandemic is testing both Cedars-Sinai Medical Center and Martin Luther King Jr. Community Hospital in ways never seen before. At one level, there is a growing fear that the crisis could lay bare longstanding inequities in the nation’s health care system that could ultimately make the virus more deadly in Los Angeles’s poorest communities. At M.L.K., doctors worry especially that they will be shortchanged by a system that allocates more supplies to larger trauma centers like Cedars-Sinai.

At the same time, the distinctions between the two hospitals are fading fast, as confirmed coronavirus cases in Los Angeles top 3,000 and both institutions brace for conditions they fear will overwhelm them. Neither has the equipment it says it needs to defend itself or its patients. In both places, doctors are already grappling with ethical dilemmas, putting off even needed surgeries in order to clear beds, and, as they digest the news in harder-hit places like New York and Italy, they are contemplating the even tougher life-or-death choices they fear are coming.

In many respects, they say, the virus is the great leveler.

“It doesn’t matter who you are or where you come from — this isn’t a matter of wealth,” said one Cedars-Sinai emergency room doctor, who was not authorized by the hospital to speak publicly. “This isn’t brain surgery. It’s just logistics and supplies.”

In normal times, 20 miles of interminable gridlock separate Cedars-Sinai and M.L.K. But these days, a stay-at-home order has made Los Angeles feel small. Its infamous traffic has disappeared, replaced by an eerie sense of calm.

As health care workers here track the horror unfolding in New York City, where hospitals are overwhelmed with patients and deaths are increasing, they are girding for a similar surge to hit Los Angeles.

“I was asked by a reporter today, ‘Is Los Angeles the next New York?’” Mayor Eric Garcetti of Los Angeles said last week. “And I said, ‘Sure, in the same way that New York is now the next Italy, and Italy was the next Iran, and Iran was the next China, and no matter where you live, you are the next.’”

Los Angeles County had 3,011 confirmed cases as of Tuesday, and 54 deaths, but testing is so limited that officials say they do not have a handle on how many people are actually infected, even as they believe social distancing measures have probably slowed the spread.

When a surge arrives, Los Angeles County emergency management officials say they plan to spread patients out among all the county’s acute care hospitals, meaning that where you live may not necessarily dictate where you end up. No one requiring hospitalization for Covid-19 will be turned away based on lack of insurance or inability to pay, state and federal officials have said.

Cedars-Sinai, a top research hospital, has in recent days developed its own in-house testing, and can get same-day results. M.L.K., with fewer resources, hasn’t been able to move as fast on in-house testing, and still relies on commercial labs.

As one of Los Angeles County’s largest hospitals, Cedars-Sinai, with its Level I trauma center and 886 beds, will most likely bear much of the brunt, both in terms of numbers and severity of cases.

Already, doctors there are seeing an uptick. The number of confirmed or suspected coronavirus patients at Cedars-Sinai has grown from about 50 on March 17 to about 115 as of Tuesday morning, according to a hospital official who requested anonymity because the hospital’s policy is to not release those numbers.

M.L.K., which has 131 beds, has seen only a handful of cases so far. But it faces its own set of challenges.

So far, most of Los Angeles’s positive coronavirus tests have come from wealthy communities like Brentwood, Melrose and West Hollywood, closer to Cedars-Sinai than M.L.K. Public health officials have speculated that is because many residents there have both the wherewithal to travel overseas — possibly contracting the virus that way — as well as easier access to testing.

But doctors at M.L.K. worry that no one knows how deep the virus has spread within their community’s vulnerable population. That is because tests are scarce and the county is reserving them for the sickest patients and health care workers. It is all the more concerning because many in South Los Angeles suffer from underlying conditions like diabetes and heart disease that could lead to higher death rates when the virus hits hard.

“The bigger story is the people who are vulnerable because they haven’t gotten medical care all along,” said Dr. Elaine Batchlor, the chief executive of M.L.K. “These are the same people who are preparing food in fast-food restaurants, taking care of people in day care centers.”

Even when patients are hospitalized, the basic treatment for the coronavirus is fairly straightforward. Some need fluids and oxygen and a fever addressed, while the more severe cases may need to be sedated, ventilated and fed through a tube.

Dr. Peter Chen, the head of pulmonary and critical care medicine at Cedars-Sinai, said his team has been conducting drills to accomplish those tasks as efficiently as possible and be able to handle more patients. But, he added, for “the majority of people, it’s not rocket science.”

“They have a single organ failure — their lungs,” he said. “We manage the lungs until the lungs hopefully calm down. That’s it. It’s pretty much supportive.”

The challenge comes in getting the supplies needed to treat patients with the highly infectious virus. Like hospitals across the country, Cedars-Sinai and M.L.K. are scouring for masks, gowns and ventilators.

There, Cedars-Sinai has some advantages over its counterpart: It will get a greater portion of the emergency government supplies coming down the pike because of an allocation formula that favors it and the 12 other hospitals in the county designated as trauma or disaster relief centers. Cedars-Sinai has also been able to tap into donations from private sources, like Goldman Sachs, which recently delivered a supply of masks.

Still, Dr. Chen said the hospital was “barely scraping by,” with staff members forced to reuse masks for an entire shift in order to conserve them, as are their colleagues at M.L.K. As for ventilators, the shortage is dire enough that Cedars-Sinai is considering whether other machines, such as a BiPap, which assists breathing, could be safely modified for coronavirus patients.

“My biggest fear is that we run out of protection for our staff,” Dr. Chen said. “We’re physicians — we took the Hippocratic oath. We will run into a room even if we are out of masks, but what happens if I get infected, now I can’t take care of 20 other people whose lives I could possibly save.”

At M.L.K., doctors and nurses are spending their off-hours calling up every plumber, electrician and contractor they know, pleading with them to donate masks. The hospital has 16 ventilators right now, and has put in an order for four more. Doctors say they could possibly operate up to 40, although they worry about having enough trained staff to operate them.

Dr. Oscar Casillas, the medical director of M.L.K.’s emergency department, sees the county’s system of distributing emergency supplies as fundamentally unfair. M.L.K., he said, had a disproportionate 112,000 emergency visits last year, compared with 91,000 at Cedars-Sinai, a reflection of how many people in South Los Angeles rely on the emergency room because they lack basic primary care. One of the most common surgeries at M.L.K. is amputation because of complications from diabetes.

“Our story explains how different it is in this community than anywhere else in L.A.,” Dr. Casillas said. “There just isn’t enough primary care in this area to support the population.”

Some doctors rotate between several hospitals, including M.L.K., where they arrive for shifts and tell colleagues that bigger hospitals have a better supply of protective equipment, and that can breed resentment.

“There are some of these hospitals right around us like U.C.L.A. and Cedars, and those folks are getting those supplies, and so the physicians come here and say, ‘Why aren’t you guys wearing this?’” said Jorge Gonzalez, the nurse manager in the emergency department at M.L.K. “And it’s scaring our staff, because they are seeing right in front of their faces the differences and the disparities.”

Despite Cedars-Sinai’s reputation as the “hospital to the stars,” that shorthand frame of rich versus poor belies a more complex picture.

The community Cedars-Sinai serves is significantly more prosperous, with a median household income of about $70,000, than the one served by M.L.K., where it is $37,000. But Cedars-Sinai is also the No. 1 recipient of Medicare patients in the state, and a top provider to Medicaid patients. A recent policy change also makes it the most generous nonprofit in the state in terms of free and discounted charity care.

Like hospitals across the country, Cedars and M.L.K. are working to identify any usable space to isolate non-coronavirus patients from those they suspect are infected. Both hospitals set up outdoor intake tents; and a 1,000-bed military hospital ship that just docked at the port of Los Angeles should help free up hospitals by treating non-coronavirus patients.

And to prepare for the coming surge of those carrying the virus, both are doing their best to clear beds, sending patients home or delaying surgeries they normally would not.

Dr. Richard V. Riggs, Cedar-Sinai’s chief medical officer, said that at first, only elective surgeries were postponed, but as the urgency has mounted, the hospital has also begun postponing cancer surgeries that oncologists say can wait until after May, when the peak is expected to hit.

But at M.L.K. clearing beds is complicated, because many of the patients do not have doctors in the community who can handle follow-up care.

“At least in Beverly Hills, when they send a patient home they have a doctor they know is going to take care of the person,” said Dr. Batchlor. “In our community there is just a huge deficit.”

And, they worry, they may be sending people home to living arrangements, such as homeless shelters or group homes, where social distancing is difficult, if not impossible.

“We’re feeling the pressure to clear the decks yet we feel that in a good majority of our patients if we clear the decks we actually could be creating more of a surge later on,” said Alaine Schauer, senior director of critical care at M.L.K.

But if their challenges are slightly different, their fears are much the same. One doctor doing coronavirus triage at Cedars-Sinai went home last week and, after stepping into the foyer to strip out of scrubs and bleaching the area, reread the Hippocratic oath.

“There is a ramped-up anxiety that I don’t think I’ve ever seen before,” Dr. Casillas said. “Everyone is trying to do the best they can in an unprecedented situation.”

<|endoftext|>

AJO, Ariz. — Motels, mobile home camps and Airbnbs in this small Arizona border town are full up. Work crews stream into eateries for takeout orders. License plates on trucks parked outside the crowded laundromat come from as far away as Alaska.

Around the country, some states have cut back on construction activity to curb the spread of the coronavirus, and hotels and restaurants in many cities have closed. But here in Arizona, the federal government is embarking on a frenetic new phase of construction of the border wall.

The Trump administration contends that the wall will help prevent the spread of the virus into the United States from Mexico, though epidemiologists and the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention say such a barrier would not mitigate the outbreaks already occurring in every state.

The intensification of construction during the pandemic is raising fears among residents of Ajo, Ariz., and other nearby border communities that the growing influx of workers increases their risk of exposure. Some disease specialists in Arizona are warning that workers clustered in tight quarters along the border could spread the virus around the country when they return to their families.

“This administration’s priority is to get the wall done. The rest of us might as well be damned,” said Maria Singleton, 57, an Ajo resident who has documented in Facebook posts how wall construction is affecting the town — with traffic, noise, dust and, now, new worries about getting sick.

The busy scenes around Ajo are among the many signs of relatively brisk business in Arizona, which until Monday had been one of a shrinking number of states where governors had opted against issuing stay-at-home orders. In fact, Gov. Doug Ducey, a Republican, prohibited county and city officials in Arizona from declaring their own shelter-in-place orders.

But the governor changed course on Monday after the mayors of several large cities, including Phoenix, Tucson and Flagstaff, wrote a letter urging him to “learn from the unfolding events in our sister states” and issue a statewide stay-at-home order.

Mr. Ducey issued a directive preventing people from leaving their homes except for food, medicine, exercise and other “essential activities.”

He said the order, which allows police officers to warn violators before citing them, was aimed at ensuring there would be sufficient capacity in Arizona’s health care system for infected patients. Mr. Ducey is still allowing businesses to remain open if they are considered essential, which in Arizona includes golf courses, nail salons and pawn shops.

The state is facing a surge in coronavirus cases. Pima County, which includes small outposts like Ajo as well as the city of Tucson, had 187 confirmed cases of the coronavirus as of Monday afternoon, with six fatalities. Across the state, at least 20 people are known to have died from Covid-19 and more than 1,100 have tested positive for the virus.

The new wall construction in southern Arizona is part of a wider plan to expand fencing along the 1,100-mile border, a signature goal of President Trump’s.

The Department of Homeland Security announced plans this month to build or replace more than 91 miles of barriers along the border between Arizona and Mexico. Authorities are also planning to build 86 miles of wall along stretches of the border in other states.

In recent days, New York, Washington State, Massachusetts and Pennsylvania have all put limits on nonessential construction, leaving room in some cases for such projects as hospitals and homeless shelters.

But in Kansas City, Mo., work is moving forward on the $1.5 billion expansion of the Kansas City International Airport. And in Florida, Virgin Trains USA is proceeding on a $4 billion train route between Orlando and West Palm Beach. Construction is also still taking place on some major public venues, such as the $4.9 billion SoFi Stadium, a sports-and-entertainment complex on the site of the former Hollywood Park racetrack in Inglewood, Calif.

Turner AECOM Hunt, the joint venture overseeing the construction of the stadium, confirmed this week that an ironworker on the site had tested positive for the coronavirus.

Ajo, a haven for artists and retirees that draws snowbirds in the winter from around the United States, is far removed from most of the coronavirus hot spots in the country, and seemingly ill-prepared for any outbreak.

The town’s hospital, founded by the Phelps Dodge Corporation in the days when Ajo was a copper mining town, lies abandoned; a small clinic now provides basic health care.

Many of those living in Ajo are older adults, and there are fears that they are especially vulnerable to any transmission among the crowds of construction workers, engineers and truck drivers who have been descending in recent months.

During her morning routine of writing in her journal, praying and drinking coffee, Ms. Singleton all month has been counting the large number of semi trucks barreling through Ajo to worksites along the border.

“I counted 22 trucks one morning and it made me sick to my stomach,” Ms. Singleton said.

While bars are closed and restaurants are only providing takeout, it remains hard to get a hotel room in the town. Workers unable to stay in hotels or RV parks are living cheek by jowl in rented houses.

“Put the wall on pause immediately, that’s my advice,” said Kacey Ernst, an infectious disease epidemiologist at the University of Arizona who has watched the new construction boom with alarm. “These workers are potentially amplifying the virus around the country when they return home. This needs to stop.”

So far, there appears to be no plan to slow down construction. Raini Brunson, a spokeswoman for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, said the agency was following “government and C.D.C. guidelines” to determine how best to proceed with the work.

“As the guidance changes, decisions will be made as to how contractor employees will be affected,” Ms. Brunson said in a statement.

Kiewit Corporation, the Nebraska construction giant that has hundreds of millions of dollars in contracts to build the wall near Ajo and other stretches along the border, said it had taken steps to protect workers, including having support personnel work from home, reorganizing work crews, sanitizing shared equipment and screening employees for virus symptoms.

“This is an unprecedented situation, and we are updating our policies, procedures and guidance to workers daily as the situation evolves,” said Angela Nemeth, a Kiewit spokeswoman. Ms. Nemeth said there were no known cases of company workers on the border wall testing positive for the coronavirus.

The outbreak has been seized on as new ammunition for Mr. Trump in his longstanding effort to justify the border barrier.

“We will do everything in our power to keep the infection and those carrying the infection from entering our country,” he said at a campaign rally in February.

But epidemiologists say that a wall would do little or nothing to stop the virus, which initially entered the country via infected travelers who arrived on airplanes and cruise ships.

“I’ll be blunt: We already have so many outbreaks around the country and so much community transmission that the wall is meaningless for preventing spread of the virus,” said Tara C. Smith, an epidemiologist at Kent State University in Ohio.

Dr. Smith added, “Even if a few extra cases make it across the southern border, those are teardrops in the ocean right now in terms of what we are facing.”

In an unusual twist to border politics, leaders in Mexico are expressing concern that the widening outbreak in the United States could threaten stability in Mexico. The governors of states in northern Mexico have recently urged their president to do more to stop people from crossing into Mexico from the United States.

Yet some in Ajo are not at all perturbed about the pace of border wall construction, which they see as a welcome lift for the town.

“The wall is a blessing,” said Zakir Shah, 47, a Pakistani immigrant who owns La Siesta Motel & RV Resort, which is nearly at full capacity thanks to the influx of wall workers. “Business is getting stronger for me now. There’s no need to shut this down.”

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — The federal government is open for coronavirus business, and the scramble to get some of it is on.

A South Carolina company has hired a lobbyist close to President Trump to try to win regulatory approval to sell a misting spray to kill coronavirus on airplanes. A Manhattan company is seeking money from the $2 trillion stimulus package for its quick-change recyclable hospital curtains. Two prominent and well-connected Republican fund-raisers have linked up with competing businesses, both claiming to be able to acquire coveted equipment like coronavirus test kits and masks.

Across the country, companies see a chance to cash in, do some good for the country or both, making virus outbreak response one of the few thriving sectors of the economy. And because so much of the business runs through Washington, the rush has created new opportunities for those who can offer access, influence and expertise in navigating bureaucratic hurdles and securing chunks of the relief package Mr. Trump signed into law on Friday.

The boomlet has left the federal agencies responsible for regulating cleaning supplies, medical devices and medicines working overtime on requests to certify products for use in coronavirus response — and to clamp down on fraud.

The Food and Drug Administration has been processing a surge in applications for coronavirus vaccine and treatment trials. But the agency also has spent considerable time and resources fighting what it calls “fraudulent Covid-19 products.”

Likewise, the Environmental Protection Agency has been cracking down on unregistered products claiming to kill coronavirus, and processing requests to list various disinfectants as approved to kill the virus on surfaces.

“I was on the phone earlier with E.P.A. today, and we’re both working 24/7,” said Hal Ambuter, who leads North American regulatory and government affairs for the British consumer-product maker Reckitt Benckiser, which makes Lysol disinfectants.

The company has been working with the E.P.A. to add more of the brand’s products to a list of disinfectants approved to kill coronavirus on surfaces. “There is a lot of work in our side, and there is a lot of work on their side to handle the volume of requests that have come in,” he said in an interview on Friday.

The company’s outside counsel, Benjamin Dunham, lobbied Congress on provisions included in the stimulus bill, which included $1.5 million for the E.P.A. to facilitate faster regulatory processing of coronavirus-killing disinfectants.

Reckitt Benckiser has paid Mr. Dunham’s firm $30,000 so far this year, according to a lobbying report filed this week. It indicated that a focus of his lobbying was increasing E.P.A. funding “to expedite registration actions involving disinfectant products that are effective against” coronavirus.

This month, a South Carolina-based company called NanoPure hired Brian Ballard, a lobbyist who is a top fund-raiser for Mr. Trump, to help it seek approval for a misting spray disinfectant system to kill bacteria and viruses on airplanes and airports and other institutional settings.

On its website, the company says it “has obtained an exclusive, worldwide license from the United States Government to sell and distribute NanoPure’s nanotechnology platform which kills air- and surface-borne mold, bacteria, and viruses at a 99.9999% rate of effectiveness.”

The law and lobbying firm Holland & Knight set up an entire “Covid-19 Response Team,” which is expected to grow to include as many as 60 lawyers, according to someone familiar with the firm’s efforts.

In a promotional brochure, it promised it could help prospective clients “survive and succeed during this uncertain period,” by securing government grants and “pandemic response funds in federal legislation” for a wide variety of uses.

The firm also says it can help laboratories navigate the Food and Drug Administration’s approval processes to bring “tests and treatments to market efficiently and effectively,” and apply for the agency’s emergency use authorization “to allow marketing of a coronavirus test.”

The firm lobbied to shape the stimulus bill on behalf of a hotel industry client, according to the person familiar with the firm’s efforts. It also helped get clients in the paper and chemical industries included on a list of critical industries allowed to continue operations during coronavirus-triggered shutdowns.

Last week, the firm registered to lobby for the battery maker Energizer Holdings on issues including winning “designation as critical industry/infrastructure on coronavirus relief packages,” according to a filing.

Van D. Hipp Jr., a former deputy assistant secretary of the Army and Republican Party official, registered this month as a lobbyist for one company involved in diagnostic testing and another that provides treatments for viral infections. On lobbying registration forms, he indicated he would arrange “meetings with officials regarding rapid testing for Covid-19,” and reach out to Congress on “issues related to the treatment of immune compromised patients who have documented Covid-19 infections.”

Lee C. Weingart, the founder of the lobbying firm LNE Group, said his firm is “busier now than we’ve been,” because of the stimulus.

His firm registered this week to lobby for On the Right Track Systems, Inc., a Manhattan-based manufacturer of recyclable hospital cubical curtains, to assist in obtaining federal money allocated to states and hospitals for coronavirus treatment.

Mr. Weingart said that the company has seen a sharp spike in demand for its curtains, which he said can be replaced in a fraction of the time it takes to replace more traditional curtains that surround hospital beds. “They’re shipping twice as many curtains in March as they did in January and February,” he said, adding that, in coronavirus response, “turnover of hospital rooms is critical.”

A Buffalo-area team is working to win approval from the E.P.A. for a retail version of a disinfectant.

A concentrated disinfectant made by one of the firms involved was added by the E.P.A. this month to the list of products that could be marketed to kill germs in the coronavirus family. The company linked up with Joe Mallare, who co-owns a company that makes melamine sponges, to try to sell a diluted version to individual customers. But the E.P.A. informed the team on Thursday that they would need to submit a new application, rather than an amendment to their existing registration for the concentrated blend, which is sold to institutional customers.

Mr. Mallare said his team is still committed to winning approval, and called the E.P.A. “very understanding and helpful,” including engaging in midnight email exchanges about the application process. “With this virus going, everybody in America needs this,” he said of his team’s product.

Confused by the terms about coronavirus testing? Let us help:

Mr. Mallare is being assisted by a pair of Republican operatives, David Ferguson and Peggy J. Ellis. They have enlisted support for the effort from members of Congress and helped Mr. Mallare’s team connect with the appropriate officials in the E.P.A.’s Antimicrobials Division.

Mr. Ferguson, who specializes in conservative issue advocacy and is not a registered federal lobbyist, said “we’re just trying to use our connections to do what’s right for the country in a time of national crisis.” He said he’s doing the work on a volunteer basis, adding “this is not my core business, and now is not a time for making money.”

For plenty of other Washington veterans, coronavirus is, indeed, a time for making money.

Mike Gula, a veteran Republican fund-raiser whose firm has been paid more than $36 million since 2008 by a range of top Republican politicians and political committees, sent an email on Thursday to clients announcing that he was leaving political fund-raising to focus his “full attention” on “another business outside politics.”

That business is a newly incorporated firm called Blue Flame Medical that boasts on its website that it has assembled an array of “hard-to-find medical supplies to beat the outbreak,” including respirator & surgical masks, coronavirus test kits “and a wide selection” of personal protective equipment.

Neither Mr. Gula nor his partner in the business, a fellow Republican operative named John Thomas, had much experience in the medical supply field.

But Mr. Thomas said in an interview on Saturday that the connections they made through their work in politics helped them find suppliers and connect to customers, including large medical systems and law enforcement agencies around the world, including in the Middle East.

“In politics — especially if you’re at a high enough level — you are one phone call away from anybody in the world,” Mr. Thomas said, adding that his new company had partnered with firms to sell and distribute its products. “It’s not about the financial motivations,” he said of his new venture, which was revealed Friday by Politico. “We’re here to solve a need to help people.”

Brad Wilson, another veteran Republican fund-raiser, who works for a firm that has been paid nearly $4 million by politicians and political committees since 2008, emailed contacts on Thursday on behalf of an Arizona-based firm called CashLabs, which is selling coronavirus-related supplies.

“If you, your company, or clients are in need of large quantities of masks, rapid test kits, or long lasting sanitizing coating (up to 6 months, child and pet friendly), please see attached,” he wrote. He attached a brochure listing prices and minimum orders for products, including $35 for a test that provides results in 10 minutes, with a minimum order of 25,000 tests. “Let me know, and I will be happy to set up a call for pricing and details,” he wrote.

In a brief phone interview on Saturday, Mr. Wilson said he had passed along the pricing sheet on behalf of a family friend who is involved in CashLabs. Mr. Wilson declined to comment when asked if he would receive a commission on sales he arranged.

Then there are industries that are appealing to the government for help repurposing existing products to help with the crisis. They include the plastics industry, which is making a plea to rethink bans on single-use plastic bags, arguing that they are more sanitary than reusable bags.

And the liquor distillers who are converting their production to hand sanitizers this week asked Congress for an exemption on the federal excise tax on liquor.

The exemption, sought by the Distilled Spirits Council, was included in the stimulus bill, but there was a wrinkle. The bill stipulated that, to qualify for the break, the hand sanitizer had to meet certain standards from the F.D.A., which has yet to approve the type of sanitizer most distilleries are producing.

Chris R. Swonger, the president of the spirits council, said most of the distilleries producing hand sanitizer want to give it away to emergency medical workers and hospitals “because the sooner we’re able to defeat Covid-19, the sooner they’ll be up making whiskey and distilled spirits again.”

<|endoftext|>

Good morning.

(Don’t get California Today by email? Here’s the sign-up.)

Earlier this week, Dr. Bob Wachter, a professor and chair of the University of California, San Francisco’s department of medicine, told us about what trends we should be paying attention to in the coronavirus crisis now.

Today, we’re looking a little further out.

As the chief health officer of Santa Clara County, Dr. Sara Cody announced the first case of coronavirus in the Bay Area in January. Last month, she led the rollout of the nation’s first shelter-in-place order.

My colleague Thomas Fuller talked with Dr. Cody about what lies ahead for California. Here’s their conversation, lightly edited and condensed:

A question about the future: Flattening the curve is a short-term solution. It slows down the first wave, the rate of infections and death, but it doesn’t eradicate the disease by any means. What’s the longer-term solution?

This is extraordinarily challenging. We look at the options before us and none of them are particularly shining and bright — none of the options looks great. We are trying to optimize and do the very best we can given the circumstances.

For example, we do not have widespread testing.

We don’t yet have a widely available antibody test in order to be able to pair someone who is immune and put them out on the front line for all the essential work that needs to be done. We have a shortage of personal protective equipment. We need to be very careful about how we assess our supply, how we estimate what our demand and burn rate is going to be.

Do I hear from you that it’s been so difficult that you haven’t had time to think about how to handle the next waves?

We are already thinking about that. But I’d be lying if I told you that we had exquisitely detailed plans.

There are phases. The very first phase was containment. That was when every single case we had, we absolutely went to the mat. We found every single contact we possibly could. Every case was quarantined under a strict legal order, every case was isolated under a strict legal order. We followed them carefully, their symptoms, visits, tests.

Then at some point the rocket ship takes off and you need to shift strategies. And that’s when we moved to mitigation. That’s when we started doing things like the first order to ban gatherings greater than 1,000, and then moving to gatherings greater than 100, and then finally to the first shelter-in-place order.

The idea is that we slow the train down for a couple reasons. The top level reason is to preserve the capacity of the health care system to care for people who get sick. But the other is if we bend the curve and are able to reduce the case count then we can go back to more refined containment strategies and marry those with the mitigation.

With more testing available, can the shelter-in-place orders be lifted and as soon as an outbreak is identified, a rush to contain it? Are you hoping that’s what comes next?

That’s exactly right. We started out with containment, we are now in very broad-based mitigation.

Eventually if we slow it down enough, when we put together more resources and the numbers are less than 1,000, then we could do some more of the individual case investigations, rapid isolation, and that would be another way to slow things down.

All of this we’re doing while there’s a race to develop a vaccine.

But we don’t know if a vaccine will come or not. We’ve had mixed results with previous coronaviruses.

That’s right.

There’s this paradox that the better you are at managing the first wave of the virus, the more vulnerable you are to the second wave because you have so many people who are not immune. Is there a fear for the second wave, that the initial success will not lead to any permanent solution short of a vaccine?

My hope, and I’m generally an optimistic person, is that if we had just a few more tools at the ready we could focus our resources in a more precise way.

For example, if we had antibody tests, if we could stand on that, then we would do a much better job with health care workers.

And we would also be able to understand how much of our population is immune and how much of our population is susceptible. And we could fold that into a model and estimate what might happen in a second wave — and plan.

Can you imagine a world where people who have an appropriate level of immunity are cleared to work — where the immune population would be allowed a different lifestyle than the vulnerable and not-yet-immune population?

I think I’m mostly thinking about it in terms of health care workers because of their intense exposure and because of how critical they are to the work force.

Do you fear an unwillingness to shelter in place? How much of that is going to factor into your decisions?

To go back to a fire analogy, right now where we are is fire over the ridge, fire over multiple ridges. We are just dumping fire retardant over huge swaths of land.

Once we get the fire under better control we can focus and address spot fires in a more focused way and not have to rely on the massive, entire population to shelter in place.

But we also have to understand that our populations are really mobile. Just because we might get things under control in our corner of the land doesn’t mean there won’t be continual importations from other parts of the state or the country or the world. We are a very mobile group.

And this is why, at this point, we can’t plan? We don’t see a way of getting this completely under control?

We all have to just take a very deep breath and understand that this is our new normal for a while.

[Read the latest updates from California on the coronavirus pandemic.]

We often link to sites that limit access for nonsubscribers. We appreciate your reading Times coverage, but we also encourage you to support local news if you can.

Farmworkers are often undocumented immigrants. Now, they’ve been deemed essential by a government that has sought to deport them — an irony that’s not lost on those picking the food feeding Americans as they shelter in place. [The New York Times]

Start-ups are feeling the squeeze: Dozens have laid off thousands of employees, slashed costs and are rethinking their businesses. [The New York Times]

“I wouldn’t go in the water if you paid me $1 million right now.” Think the ocean is a respite? Think again, scientists say. [The Los Angeles Times]

Income tax filers got a delay. But if you’re a homeowner, you should still plan to pay your property tax next week. [CalMatters]

And finally, a review of “Wow, No Thank You,” by Samantha Irby, our “great bard of quarantine.” [The New York Times]

California Today goes live at 6:30 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com. Were you forwarded this email? Sign up for California Today here and read every edition online here.

Jill Cowan grew up in Orange County, graduated from U.C. Berkeley and has reported all over the state, including the Bay Area, Bakersfield and Los Angeles — but she always wants to see more. Follow along here or on Twitter, @jillcowan.

California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and graduated from U.C. Berkeley.

<|endoftext|>

Blueberry Hill Public Golf Course & Lounge became a community institution almost the day it opened in western Pennsylvania in 1961, with one generation of players succeeding the next on the wooded, undulating course bordering the Allegheny National Forest.

It had its share of misfortune — last spring a tornado roared through its 400 acres, leaving $100,000 in damages across its 18 holes. With spring now budding early, Jim Roth, the general manager, anticipated a boom year even as coronavirus fears escalated — people still needed exercise, didn’t they?

“I thought I had a little bright light starting to shine, then somebody turned the light bulb off,” Mr. Roth said.

That somebody, as far as he was concerned, was Gov. Tom Wolf of Pennsylvania. On March 19, Mr. Wolf introduced an initiative to categorize businesses as “life-sustaining” or not, shuttering golf courses among the latter.

So Mr. Roth sued, joining a lawyer, a realtor, a logger, a politician and a laundry owner in demanding that the governor not hold absolute power to open and shut segments of the Pennsylvania economy like a spigot.

“I do not understand why Mr. Wolf is able to deem this business life-sustaining and this one not,” Mr. Roth said. “I think the governor might have overstepped his boundaries.”

It is a growing refrain across the United States as more governors invoke their “police powers” to take extraordinary measures to protect public health. Some Americans, many hoping to protect their livelihoods and others suspicious of such sweeping powers, are turning to the courts.

“What you will see are massive increases in the number of people who have problems that could benefit from some kind of legal assistance,” said Rebecca Sandefur, a sociologist at the American Bar Foundation.

Because of sparse online records, it is not clear how many ordinary Americans have turned to state courts for redress, legal experts said, but there has been a wave of lawsuits as state governments extend the timeline for people to stay home and to shutter their businesses.

Various political leaders and civic organizations have criticized the measures as excessive and bound to hurt the American economy, a line abandoned by President Trump but still maintained by some allies.

“We have to focus on keeping people employed,” Devin Nunes, the California congressman and top Republican on the House Intelligence Committee, told Fox News this week. “I will tell you this, if we don’t start to get people back to work in this country over the next week to two weeks, I don’t believe that we can wait until the end of April.”

As the virus continues to spread throughout the nation, an analysis of cellphone data shows that those in the wealthiest areas have been able to reduce their movements more than those in the poorest areas.

Some of those suing their state governments seek redress for specific, local grievances, as with the golf course or in a similar suit in Pennsylvania being pursued by a company that says it is the country’s oldest manufacturer of orchestra-quality bells and chimes. Those lawsuits and one in Arizona are rooted in the Fifth Amendment, which requires due process and guarantees compensation for property seized by the government.

Other constitutional amendments have been invoked in several lawsuits in recent weeks attempting to force open gun stores, or to argue that measures to curb the virus should not outweigh rights like freedom of assembly and religion.

“Those may be serious, but they may also be part of an attempt to make an argument in the press about overreach,” said Tom Burke, a political-science professor at Wellesley College who studies the politics of litigation.

History dating back to the time of 15th-century plagues shows that lawsuits typically plummet during pandemics, Mr. Burke said, for the obvious reason that courts are closed. But legal experts anticipate a tidal wave of court activity afterward — especially in fields like insurance and debt collection — because of the economic dislocation caused by the pandemic.

A smattering of those suits has already been filed. Thomas Keller, the chef behind upscale restaurants like Per Se in New York and the French Laundry in California’s Napa Valley, sued the Hartford Fire Insurance Co., asking a state court in California to confirm that the insurer must cover losses caused by the government-ordered closures.

In Oklahoma, the Chickasaw and Choctaw nations also went to state court to demand that their insurers cover losses sustained by their casinos.

Suits meant to preserve long-established rights often do not prove popular in times like this, with the public endorsing the need to make health a priority.

Dan Hynes, a lawyer and local politician in New Hampshire, was taken aback by the reaction when he sued Gov. Chris Sununu in state court, claiming that even the initial restrictions limiting the size of public gatherings like church services were an infringement on basic rights including freedom of religion and freedom of assembly.

Negative comments flooded into his social media accounts and those of the three other plaintiffs. “Knock it off,” wrote one woman on Facebook. “You can harm others with your sheer ignorance. Or, you can be a good member of a community and society.”

Merrimack Superior Court threw the suit out.

In Pennsylvania, Marc A. Scaringi, the lawyer for the golf course and others, said that the state’s Disease Prevention and Control Law, last amended in 1959, targets infected individuals. It does not refer to pandemics, nor grant the governor the extensive power he is claiming under “other catastrophes,” Mr. Scaringi said, especially without due process. Finally, the list of banned businesses seemed to change at random, with even some of his original plaintiffs removed, he argued in court papers.

At the golf course, Mr. Roth said he recognized that the measures were for the public good, but exercise was beneficial, too, and he was ready to modify the rules. He could limit golf carts to one per person, or even force players to walk, for example, and bar touching the flags.

Critics accused Governor Wolf, a Democrat, of playing favorites with the “life-sustaining” list. The governor’s former family business, which makes kitchen cabinetry, was initially deemed “life-sustaining,” the complaint said, then scratched off the list. There was also some public grumbling that the Dan Smith Candy Company, a chain in the family of State Senator Joe Scarnati, a prominent Republican politician, was operating.

“The Wolf administration’s highest priority is protecting public health and safety,” the governor said in a statement when asked about the lawsuits. By Friday afternoon, Pennsylvania had more than 8,000 coronavirus cases and 100 deaths.

The statement denied that the governor was directly involved in the choice of which companies received waivers. “Those requesting an exemption represent a fraction of the Pennsylvania business community and we are working to ensure that those exemptions are properly processed and align with our most current guidance,” the statement said.

Confectionary businesses were not closed, the statement noted, while the Dan Smith Candy Company said on its Facebook page that it was life-sustaining because it also sold spaghetti sauces, pasta, oil and other goods.

“When your neighbor’s house is burning down, though a burden, the law requires that you allow the fire engine to block your driveway for the protection of the entire neighborhood,” the state said in a brief filed by Attorney General Josh Shapiro. “A pandemic is burning across the world. The only effective tool we have to fight that fire is social distancing.”

Across the United States, closing gun shops provoked a series of lawsuits arguing that the measure violated the Second Amendment right to bear arms. Critics filed lawsuits in New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Georgia, Texas and California, where the National Rifle Association was one plaintiff.

David Jensen, the lawyer in a New Jersey case, said his clients were not necessarily arguing that gun shops be allowed to open, but that a route be found to allow some gun sales. “You cannot close off the ability of anyone to acquire a firearm,” he said.

Representatives for Everytown for Gun Safety and Moms Demand Action, allied organizations that lobby for stricter gun laws, countered that nothing in the Second Amendment suggested that gun stores enjoy special treatment during a public health crisis.

“Governors should not be pressed into declaring gun stores essential,” said John Feinblatt, the president of Everytown for Gun Safety.

In an attempt to stop the spread of the coronavirus, a vast majority of states and the Navajo Nation have given directives, affecting more than nine in 10 U.S. residents.

Defending First Amendment rights led to lawsuits in various states including New York, Maine, Georgia, Texas and New Mexico.

In New Mexico, the president of the Albuquerque Tea Party, Leland Taylor, filed a federal lawsuit claiming that the emergency orders issued by the governor, Michelle Lujan Grisham, violated the rights to worship and free assembly, among others.

Mr. Taylor initially claimed that the virus was not serious enough to warrant such emergency orders, calling it “not as egregious an infection as reported” and one with a “100 percent” cure rate by using an inexpensive antimalarial. That echoed statements from Mr. Trump about the use of antimalarial drugs in combination with antibiotics that his own experts later denied.

“This is a frivolous lawsuit based on extremely ​dangerous misinformation that, if widely disseminated, will do nothing but worsen this crisis in New Mexico and lead to more illness and death,” Nora Meyers Sackett, the spokeswoman for the governor, said in an email.

With courts shuttered, plaintiffs usually hope that emergency injunctions or similar measures will win them a quick hearing on the phone. It is hard to prevail in any case, however, over government measures designed to protect public health, legal experts said.

“The general pattern in the middle of a crisis is that courts are very deferential,” said Mr. Burke, the political scientist.

Susan C. Beachy contributed research.

<|endoftext|>

SEATTLE — Providers of health care in the nation’s poorest neighborhoods are used to toiling below the radar, treating chronic diseases and other ravages of poverty in places many Americans never see.

But the spillover effects of the coronavirus, in cutting off routine procedures and checkups that are the day-to-day rhythm of medical economics, are hitting this sector hard too, with layoffs, furloughs and fears that a system of government-supported clinics dating back to the War on Poverty could collapse.

“Our first official day of unemployment was the 23rd,” said Tracy Baker, 39, a dental auxiliary worker at a nonprofit medical clinic in a rural area of northeast Washington State where the jobless rate was already more than double the national average even before the recent blows to the economy. Her husband, Josh, 41, a machinist, lost his own job a week after she did.

Ms. Baker’s employer, New Health Community Health Center, has laid off more than a third of its work force — 60 out of 175 — over the last two weeks, as revenues plummeted from fewer paid patient visits. “It’s heartbreaking for us,” said Desiree Sweeney, the executive director of New Health. “They’re good people.”

The nation’s latticework of nonprofit community health centers was first established in the 1960s and now stretches across every state to provide about 29 million people with primary care, regardless of their ability to pay. Almost a quarter of the centers’ patients are uninsured, and almost 70 percent live in poverty. The centers are a crucial link in a fragmented American health care system that too often fails to reach into poor neighborhoods.

Recent years have been pretty good for these places. When most states expanded Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act to cover many previously uninsured low-income adults, many community health centers saw their revenues improve, sometimes dramatically. But now, the centers are being battered by ferocious crosswinds as routine medical care — including dental work, a primary source of revenue — has been put on hold to conserve resources and keep the coronavirus from spreading.

At the same time, doctors and administrators in clinics from Massachusetts, Kentucky, Idaho, Iowa and Washington State said they are being put in a new role: working with hospitals to screen people for the virus, while bracing for a surge in patients if those hospitals become overwhelmed and people have nowhere else to go. Plus preparing for a time of greater economic pain in their already struggling patient populations.

“We are expecting there will be more people seeking our services at the same time we’re not able to keep all our staff on hand,” said Chuck Jones, the chief executive at Harbor Health Services, which runs six community health centers from Boston to Cape Cod.

Mr. Jones was forced to furlough 160 people over the last few weeks — a quarter of the work force. In consolidating care and staff, he also had to shut down in-person appointments at the nation’s first community health center, called Geiger Gibson, which opened in 1965 in the basement of a public-housing project in Boston’s Dorchester neighborhood.

“It is nonsensical that in the biggest health care crisis our country has ever faced, organizations like ours are being forced to furlough people we will need,” Mr. Jones said. He said he fears for his patients, a group of Americans who, in isolation or poverty, “quietly pass off our radar.”

“I worry a lot,” he added, “that if community health centers go away, we won’t as a society hear the struggles of these people.”

Community health centers are expecting a boost from the $2 trillion stimulus package recently passed by Congress and signed by President Trump; they will share $1.3 billion. But spread across 1,362 of the centers, the money will only keep the system afloat for about 37 days from the start of the first payments, according to estimates by the National Association of Community Health Centers.

Finding a meaningful role in the crisis is the challenge that consumes people like Bill Wagner, the longtime executive director of Family Health Centers, which has eight sites serving 42,000 patients in and around Louisville, Ky. His organization’s revenue dropped by 30 percent in March, after Gov. Andy Beshear signed an executive order requiring that all non-urgent care be put on hold; he expects an even bigger loss this month.

“What is the role of a community health center during a pandemic?” Mr. Wagner said. “The roles of the hospital I.C.U.s and E.R.s and the public health departments are clear. But we’re kind of in the middle here.”

Family Health Centers is trying to ramp up telemedicine visits — using both phone and video — to help patients keep common ailments like diabetes, high blood pressure, asthma and depression in check. The organization spent a portion of the $100,000 it received from the first round of stimulus spending on 40 new tablets for providers to conduct video visits. But while Medicaid now pays for such visits, they can be difficult for low-income patients who often “don’t have the minutes on their phone, don’t have the data plan,” Mr. Wagner said.

For now, Mr. Wagner’s clinics are devoting afternoons to screening patients who might be infected with the coronavirus; they wait in the parking lot until an exam room is free. They have tested more than 100 patients to date, including 14 who were positive for the virus.

Mr. Wagner said he is particularly concerned about educating patients who are homeless or refugees about the virus; Family Health Centers has a site dedicated to each of these populations.

In Ottumwa, Iowa, Dr. Ken Jones, the dental director for River Hills Community Health Center, said he feels that the need for clinics in his service area will only grow as the epidemic and its harsh economic impact both unfold at the same time.

“In southeast Iowa we serve eight counties, the poverty belt, so we already have a high number of uninsured patients,” Dr. Jones said. Widespread layoffs will only increase the ranks of the uninsured, he said. “I think the role of the community health centers is just going to be that much more important.”

One dentist on Dr. Jones’s staff, Jessica Williams, who is now performing only urgent care dental work, said the already high infection risk in her job has been compounded by the unknowns of the coronavirus’s spread and the staff reductions on the dental team. “I have to put that fear aside,” Dr. Williams wrote in an email, describing two patients who came in recently with bad infections and dire pain.

“When I took out their abscessed, crumbling teeth, scooped out the pus and infected tissue, and said ‘It’s out,’ they sighed, thanked God, and thanked me profusely. In that order. It’s just a reminder that those patients appreciate us, see the value in our work, our sacrifice. Reminds me of the job I signed up for and why.”

In Whatcom, County, Wash., which is served by Sea Mar Community Health Centers, based in Seattle, 10,696 people have filed for unemployment over the last two weeks, in a county with about 229,000 people.

Hard times, said Dr. Christine Hancock, a family practitioner at Sea Mar, will lead more economically struggling or uninsured patients to Sea Mar’s doors. “Patients basically don’t have anywhere to go except for a few community health centers in the county,” she said. “It’s just kind of the reality.”

Kirk Johnson reported from Seattle, and Abby Goodnough from Washington.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — The top government scientists battling the coronavirus estimated on Tuesday that the deadly pathogen could kill 100,000 to 240,000 Americans as it ravages the country despite social distancing measures that have closed schools, banned large gatherings, limited travel and forced people to stay in their homes.

Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the nation’s leading infectious disease expert, and Dr. Deborah L. Birx, who is coordinating the coronavirus response, displayed that grim projection at a White House briefing, calling it “our real number” but pledging to do everything possible to reduce it.

As dire as those predictions are, Dr. Fauci and Dr. Birx said the number of deaths could be much higher if Americans did not follow the strict guidelines vital to keeping the virus from spreading. The White House models they displayed showed that more than 2.2 million people could have died in the United States if nothing were done.

Those conclusions were based on a continuing analysis of cases in the United States and generally matched those from similar models created by public health researchers around the globe. The two public health officials urged people to take the restrictions seriously, and a subdued President Trump, appearing with them, echoed that message, saying that now is not the time to relax.

“I want every American to be prepared for the hard days that lie ahead,” said Mr. Trump, who answered questions for more than two hours and predicted that there would be “light at the end of the tunnel,” but warned that “we’re going to go through a very tough two weeks.”

Dr. Fauci and Dr. Birx showed charts indicating that coronavirus cases in New York and New Jersey had risen far higher than in other parts of the country, a fact that they said gave them hope that the overall number of deaths might be lower if people in the rest of the states followed the guidelines for at least the next month.

Mr. Trump displayed none of the carefree dismissiveness that characterized his reaction to the virus in February and early March, when he repeatedly said that “we have it totally under control” and that “it’s going to be just fine.” For most of the briefing on Tuesday, the president appeared to understand the severity of the potentially grave threat to the country.

But asked about whether the impeachment effort had distracted him in the early days of the pandemic, Mr. Trump reverted to form, lashing out at Democrats and once again calling it “a phony impeachment” and “a hoax.” He acknowledged that he might have been distracted, but insisted that he still deserved an “A+” for his effort to combat the virus.

But outbreaks in New Orleans, Detroit and other cities are growing quickly, and experts say it is unclear whether social distancing measures can stop them from rising even more in the next few weeks. Recent estimates in Florida suggest that it may be entering a phase of exponential growth. 

Dr. Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, stressed that even with those efforts, it was possible that nearly a quarter-million people in the United States could lose their lives.

“As sobering a number as that is, we should be prepared for it,” he said.

The president, who on Sunday extended for 30 days the government’s recommendations for slowing the spread of the virus, made it clear that the data compiled by Dr. Fauci and Dr. Birx convinced him that the death toll would be even higher if the restrictions on work, school, travel and social life were not taken seriously by all Americans.

Mr. Trump said the virus was a “great national trial unlike any we have ever faced before,” and said it would require the “full absolute measure of our collective strength, love and devotion” in order to minimize the number of people infected.

“It’s a matter of life and death, frankly,” he said, offering a sober assessment of the pandemic’s effect on the United States. “It’s a matter of life and death.”

As of Tuesday, more than 183,500 cases of the virus have been reported in the United States, with more than 3,700 deaths — more than 1,500 of which are in New York, the center of the nation’s outbreak.

Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, Democrat of New York, told residents of the state that things would continue to get worse — the peak was not expected there for another one to three weeks. 

On Wall Street, the S&P 500 declined 1.6 percent on Tuesday, the end of a month in which the index fell 12.5 percent.

The projection released at the White House was the first time that Mr. Trump’s administration had officially estimated the breadth of the threat to human life from the disease caused by the coronavirus, Covid-19. In the past several weeks, Dr. Birx and Dr. Fauci have resisted predicting how many people might die in the pandemic, saying that there was not enough reliable data.

That is no longer the case, they said.

Public health scientists spent the past week constructing a model that could predict how widely the virus would spread in the coming months and how many people who get infected would succumb to the disease. Dr. Birx said the result was clear: The only way to minimize deaths is to continue the difficult restrictions on American life.

“There’s no magic bullet. There’s no magic vaccine or therapy. It’s just behaviors,” Dr. Birx said. “Each of our behaviors, translating into something that changes the course of this viral pandemic over the next 30 days.”

The new government estimates came to the same conclusion that other researchers have: that even with the isolation efforts already underway to limit the spread of the coronavirus, infections are almost certain to soar, straining the ability of hospitals to care for infected patients and leading to a growing number of deaths.

One of those models, created by scientists at the University of Washington’s Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, predicts that deaths from the virus in the United States will rise rapidly during April, reaching a total of about 84,000 by the beginning of August.

The model uses the severe lockdown in Wuhan, China, to calibrate how the outbreak might play out in the United States. That approach has some critics because control measures imposed in the United States have generally been less stringent than those in Wuhan. “If we fail at those measures, we face outcomes far worse than any included in the range of possibilities predicted by their model,” said Carl T. Bergstrom, a professor of biology at the University of Washington.

A second study, released on March 17 by the epidemic modeling group at Imperial College London and written by 30 scientists on its coronavirus response team, predicted that if the United States had done nothing to prevent the spread of the virus, 2.2 million people could have died. If, however, the government tried to isolate people suspected of having the virus and people they were in contact with, the number of deaths could be cut in half, the researchers said.

They concluded that only a nationwide suppression effort — an expanded version of efforts now underway across parts of the country — might significantly reduce the death toll. But they warned that such efforts might have to be maintained for long periods to ensure that the threat is over.

Mr. Trump, who spent weeks playing down the threat of the virus — and who has retreated from saying that social distancing could be scaled back in mid-April — congratulated himself at the briefing for projections showing that public health measures may significantly limit the national death toll.

“What would have happened if we did nothing? Because there was a group that said, ‘Let’s just ride it out,’” the president said, without saying what group he was referring to. He noted the estimate that as many as 2.2 million people “would have died if we did nothing, if we just carried on with our life.”

“You would have seen people dying on airplanes; you would have seen people dying in hotel lobbies. You would have seen death all over,” Mr. Trump said. By comparison, he said, a potential death toll of 100,000 “is, according to modeling, a very low number.”

Asked whether the projected death toll might be lower still had he called for social distancing measures weeks earlier than mid-March, almost two months after the first confirmed case of the coronavirus in the United States, Mr. Trump insisted that he had acted decisively, noting that he had limited air travel from China on Feb 2. and from Europe six weeks later.

Dr. Birx said it was impossible to know whether earlier action would have made a substantial difference until widespread antibody testing revealed how many Americans had already been infected without realizing it.

“If there was no virus in the background” in late winter, Dr. Fauci added, “there was nothing to mitigate.” If the virus was already widespread at the time, he said, then the answer was “probably yes.”

Mr. Trump said that his weeks of largely dismissive commentary about the virus, until a recent abrupt change in tone, were meant to reassure Americans. “I want to be positive. I don’t want to be negative,” the president said. “I want to give people in this country hope.” He also insisted that what “nobody knew about this virus is how contagious it was,” even though health experts were alarmed by its virulence as early as January.

Near the end of a marathon briefing that lasted more than two hours, Mr. Trump said that the United States was “going through probably the worst thing the country’s ever seen,” adding that “we lose more here potentially than you lose in world wars as a country.”

Models of the spread of any infectious disease often give widely varying estimates of the ultimate death toll. Modelers use different assumptions on how the disease will spread and how much people change their behavior to stop new infections.

Michael D. Shear and Michael Crowley reported from Washington, and James Glanz from New York.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — It was a send-off for the ages, with hundreds of sailors aboard the aircraft carrier Theodore Roosevelt cheering Capt. Brett E. Crozier, the commander who sacrificed his naval career by writing a letter to his superiors demanding more help as the novel coronavirus spread through the ship.

The rousing show of support provided the latest gripping scene to emerge from the coronavirus pandemic: the rank and file shouting their admiration for a boss they viewed as putting their safety ahead of his career.

The memes were quick to sprout on social media. On Reddit, one depicted Captain Crozier forced to choose between rescuing his career or his sailors from a burning building; he chooses his sailors. On Twitter, a slew of videos showed Captain Crozier’s walk down the gangway in Guam, most of them depicting him as a hero struck down by his superiors for trying to save the lives of his crew. “Wrongfully relieved of command but did right by sailors,” wrote Twitter user Dylan Castillo, alongside a video of Captain Crozier leaving his ship.

But in removing Captain Crozier from command, senior Navy officials said they were protecting the historic practice that complaints and requests have to go up a formal chain of command. They argued that by sending his concerns to 20 or 30 people in a message that eventually leaked to news organizations, Captain Crozier showed he was no longer fit to lead the fast-moving effort to treat the crew and clean the ship.

His removal from prestigious command of an aircraft carrier with almost 5,000 crew members has taken on an added significance, as his punishment is viewed by some in the military as indicative of the government’s handling of the entire pandemic, with public officials presenting upbeat pictures of the government’s response, while contrary voices are silenced.

The cheering by the sailors is the most public repudiation of military practices to battle the virus since the pandemic began. At the Pentagon, officials expressed concern about the public image of a Defense Department not doing enough to stay ahead of the curve on the virus.

Notably, the defense of the firing offered by senior Pentagon officials has centered around Captain Crozier not following the chain of command in writing his letter, which found its way to newspapers. In a circuitous explanation, Thomas B. Modly, the acting Navy secretary, said that Captain Crozier’s immediate superior did not know that the captain was going to write the letter, offering that act as an error in leadership and one of the reasons the Navy had lost confidence in the Roosevelt captain.

But a Navy official familiar with the situation but not authorized to speak publicly about it said that the captain had repeatedly asked his superiors for speedy action to evacuate the ship. His letter, the official said, came because the Navy was still minimizing the risk.

Mr. Modly insisted that his firing the captain for writing a letter asking for more help does not mean that subordinate officers are not allowed to raise criticisms and ask for assistance. “To our commanding officers,” Mr. Modly told reporters on Thursday, “it would be a mistake to view this decision as somehow not supportive of your duty to report problems, request help, protect your crews, challenge assumptions as you see fit.”

But the removal of Captain Crozier will likely have a chilling effect on the willingness of commanders to bring bad news to their superiors.

“There’s no question they had the authority to remove him,” Kathleen H. Hicks, a former top Pentagon official in the Obama administration, said in an email. “The issue is one of poor judgment in choosing to do so. They are fueling mistrust in leader transparency, among service members, families, and surrounding/hosting communities.”

Ms. Hicks, who is now at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington, added that the episode “lays bare the broader incompatibility in the Defense Department’s dual-track approach of attempting to tightly control and centralize its strategic communications at the same time it has adopted a highly decentralized approach to combating the coronavirus.”

Representative Ruben Gallego, Democrat of Arizona, is a former enlisted Marine who saw heavy combat in Iraq. In an interview Friday, he described the Navy’s actions in firing Captain Crozier as “dangerous.”

“For the men and women on the Roosevelt and across the Navy, the message is this,” Mr. Gallego said. “If the commander is looking out for you and doesn’t go about it the right way he’s going to get punished. It’s dangerous, it’s going to impact morale and retention rates.”

Mr. Gallego pointed to the firings of the commanders of the John McCain and the Fitzgerald, two destroyers that were involved in fatal accidents in 2017 that killed 17 sailors. Those firings came after months of investigations, while Captain Crozier was fired within three days of his letter becoming public.

Yet the Trump administration has in several high-profile war crimes cases chosen not to punish those accused. President Trump, for instance, granted clemency to Chief Petty Officer Edward Gallagher, a Navy SEAL who was acquitted of murder last year but convicted of a lesser war crime.

For the military, a core issue is that, as the virus spreads, it becomes increasingly difficult to carry on with training and missions.

At U.S. military outposts around the world, commanders have stopped training alongside local forces and instituted other measures to seal off their troops from the virus. Even so, the moves are ultimately half measures as the military, especially those who are deployed, live in shared spaces and can hardly practice the social-distancing restrictions that public health experts recommend to curb the spread of the virus.

That problem is only amplified in the Navy.

Each ship — with confined berthing areas, mess halls and shared bathrooms — is a cramped cell where social distancing is nearly impossible. Once the virus gets on a ship, it is bound to spread, both military officials and infectious disease experts say. Already, Navy officials are worried that other ships may become infected.

Other branches of the military are having issues as well.

Air Force warplanes are flying fewer missions and conducting fewer trainings, operating with split shifts and split crews to limit the exposure of personnel to the virus. The Army has stopped training for some units, the better to limit chances of getting the virus.

As part of his extended explanation of why he removed Captain Crozier, Mr. Modly asserted at a news conference Thursday that the release of Captain Crozier’s letter had panicked the crew and family members, and embarrassed the Navy’s leadership.

“It undermines our efforts and the chain of command’s efforts to address this problem and creates a panic,” he said. “And creates a perception that the Navy’s not on the job, the government’s not on the job.”

But videos taken by crew members aboard the Roosevelt and posted on social media on Friday seemed to contradict that assessment.

The sailors on the Roosevelt did not look panicked. Since Captain Crozier’s letter first surfaced, the Navy had evacuated hundreds off the ship, with more each day. During Captain Crozier’s final walk off the ship, many sailors could be seen with their bags packed on the floor next to them as they cheered their departing captain.

It was a surreal scene, beginning with Captain Crozier’s solemn walk through the massive ship’s sprawling hangar bay — a snaking procession that wrapped around a pair of dormant F/A-18 fighter jets and into the cool Guam night.

There was the ship’s bell, and then its whistle. The crew, hundreds of them, some in civilian clothes, others in uniform, slowly saluted as Captain Crozier walked past with a black backpack slung over his left shoulder.

“Captain, United States Navy, departing,” a voice piped in over the loudspeaker. As Captain Crozier reached the gangway, the slender ramp that stretched from ship to shore, he turned back toward his ship. His crew cheered.

The nearly half dozen videos posted to social media, all from different angles amid the throng of sailors, include thundering cheers of “Captain Crozier.” One crew member yells, “Hooyah skipper!” In another video, someone says, “Now that’s how you send off one of the greatest captains you ever had … the GOAT,” using the acronym for Greatest Of All Time. “The man for the people.”

<|endoftext|>

NEWTON, Mass. — The mayor of Holyoke, Mass., got an unsigned letter over the weekend that deeply disturbed him.

“Are you aware of the horrific circumstances at the Soldiers’ Home?” the letter read, and went on to describe serious breaches, like a resident suspected of having the coronavirus, awaiting the results of a test, being sent back to a dementia ward with 20 other veterans.

“Where is the state in addressing what is truly happening in this building?” the letter concluded.

The mayor, Alex Morse, reached out to Bennett Walsh, the superintendent of the Holyoke Soldiers’ Home, a 247-bed, state-managed nursing home for veterans, to figure out what was going on.

But by then, Mr. Morse said, the damage was far more than he had imagined: In a matter of five days, eight veterans had died, apparently without being reported to either state or local officials. Others were sick with the coronavirus; staff members were too.

Mr. Walsh’s explanations left the mayor “incredibly disappointed,” and so did a conversation with Mr. Walsh’s superior, Francisco Urena, Massachusetts’ Secretary of Veterans’ Services. Frustrated and “with a sense of disappointment at the lack of urgency,” Mr. Morse contacted Lt. Gov. Karyn Polito. 

By Monday, state officials had announced a series of major moves.

Mr. Walsh was placed on administrative leave. A new command structure was put in place. The National Guard was brought in to speed up testing of staff and patients.

And that, Mr. Morse said, is increasingly the role of local government in the coronavirus crisis: To keep watch.

“Mayors should make themselves available, should be vigilant in getting as much information as possible,” he said. “Mayors have to know what’s going on within their community. I don’t have oversight over the facility, but it’s still my city.”

By Tuesday, 10 residents and seven staff members had tested positive for the coronavirus, with 25 more awaiting test results. Among 13 recent deaths, tests had come back positive for the virus in six cases, while five were still pending, another was inconclusive, and another came back negative.

Flags in Holyoke, a city of 40,000 around 90 miles west of Boston, were lowered to half-staff on Tuesday in honor of the veterans who died.

“These are people who gave their all, who risked their lives to protect all of us, and they deserved better, frankly,” Mr. Morse said.

State Representative Aaron Vega, whose district includes Holyoke, said he was still trying to understand how the virus could have moved so swiftly through the home’s population without word getting out to local officials.

“All of us in Western Mass support that home, and nobody knew anything,” he said. “The fact that nobody knew anything until it was in the news is trouble.”

Gov. Charlie Baker, in a news conference, said he had not learned of the deaths until Sunday night, when he spoke with Mr. Morse. 

 “In the short term, our primary focus is going to be on stabilizing and supporting the health and safety of the residents and their families,” he said. “And we will get to the bottom of what happened and when — and by who.”

Messages for Mr. Walsh were not immediately answered, and no one representing the Soldiers’ Home could be immediately reached for comment.

Brooke Karanovich, a spokeswoman from the state’s Executive Office of Health and Human Services, said the state “took immediate action” as soon as it learned the extent of the coronavirus outbreak.

Most of those who have died were not identified.

But one of the dead was Theodore A. Monette, 74, a former senior official at the Federal Emergency Management Agency, who helped coordinate the emergency response in Lower Manhattan after the World Trade Center attacks, and in New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina.

A retired U.S. Army colonel who had served in the Vietnam War and Persian Gulf war, Mr. Monette had moved into the facility two months ago after the death of his wife, who had been his caretaker.

“They told me he was probably the highest-ranked guy there,” but so self-deprecating that he would rarely tell anybody his rank, said his daughter, Aimee Monette.

She recalled that one of her father’s physical therapists once Googled him and returned to her afterward in wide-eyed amazement.

Ms. Monette said she had initially learned from a community message board on Facebook that some veterans at the Soldiers’ Home had contracted the virus.

An anxious nurse called her last week, she said, to report that her father’s oxygen levels had dropped. Ms. Monette said they should transfer him to a hospital.

“They’re all dealing with something completely new, and everyone’s scared,” she said. “I don’t want to place blame, but the protocol should have happened faster.” Mr. Monette died on Monday, and no memorial is yet scheduled, she said.

“He deserves the full-on Army taps and the flag and everything,” she said. “But we have to wait.”

<|endoftext|>

With a lack of data on how the coronavirus may affect pregnant women, we recently found answers to expecting mothers’ most pressing questions on the pandemic. We’d like to continue to hear your concerns about bearing a child during this volatile time. Please use the form below.

A reporter or editor may contact you. Your information will not be published without your consent.

<|endoftext|>

LOS ANGELES — Concerned that thousands of migrant children in federal detention facilities could be in danger of contracting the coronavirus, a federal judge in Los Angeles late on Saturday ordered the government to “make continuous efforts” to release them from custody.

The order from Judge Dolly M. Gee of the United States District Court came after plaintiffs in a long-running case over the detention of migrant children cited reports that four children being held at a federally licensed shelter in New York had tested positive for the virus.

“The threat of irreparable injury to their health and safety is palpable,” the plaintiffs’ lawyers said in their petition, which called for migrant children across the country to be released to outside sponsors within seven days, unless they represent a flight risk.

There are currently about 3,600 children in shelters around the United States operated under license by the federal Office of Refugee Resettlement, and about 3,300 more at three detention facilities for migrant children held in custody with their parents, operated by the Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency.

Advocates for immigrants have tried for decades to limit the government’s ability to detain children apprehended after crossing the border, arguing that it is psychologically harmful, violates their rights and undermines their long-term health. 

Now, some say, the coronavirus represents an even more immediate threat.

In addition to the four children who tested positive in New York, at least one child is in quarantine and awaiting results of a test for the virus at a detention facility operated by ICE, according to documents filed with the court.

In her ruling on Saturday, the judge declined to order an immediate release of all the detained children, given current travel restrictions and the need to ensure that children are released to suitable sponsors, most often family members.

She said, however, that both of the agencies operating migrant children detention facilities must by April 6 provide an accounting of their efforts to release those in custody.

“Her order will undoubtedly speed up releases,” said Peter Schey, co-counsel for the plaintiffs in the court case.

Judge Gee’s jurisdiction stems from a 1997 consent decree, known as the Flores agreement, that established a 20-day limit on the secure detention of migrant children, as well as standards for their care. 

In September, Judge Gee rejected new regulations that would have let the government hold children and their parents in detention for indefinite periods, one of the Trump administration’s signature efforts to curtail the large number of families that had been arriving from Central America.

In her order, Judge Gee said the plaintiffs had a strong likelihood of succeeding with their claim that both ICE and the refugee resettlement office had breached the Flores agreement by failing to release minors in a prompt manner, especially in light of the widening coronavirus outbreak.

The court found that the Office of Refugee Resettlement “appears to be in substantial compliance” with guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control for protecting children from the threat of disease. But it found that ICE, which operates two facilities in Texas and one in Pennsylvania, “appears deficient.”

The agency had not included social distancing, increased personal hygiene or coronavirus testing as part of its protocol for detainees as of March 15, when reports were submitted to the court.

Nor did it recognize the potential psychological harm of quarantining or isolating children for disease control purposes, the court said, adding that recent observations showed “uneven implementation” of recommended public-health measures.

Last week, the refugee office said it had halted placements of unaccompanied children in California, New York, and Washington, where there have been large outbreaks of the coronavirus. It also reported that several staff members at shelters for migrant children had been diagnosed with Covid-19.

<|endoftext|>

In the past week and a half, Cori Bush has been hospitalized twice with shortness of breath, sore throat, fatigue, loss of taste and a headache.

Told at first that she had pneumonia, she was sent home, only to return to the emergency room when her symptoms didn’t improve. A coronavirus test came back negative, but she was admitted anyway. She was discharged on Wednesday.

“I’m worried about the bill I’m going to receive,” she said. “I drove myself to the emergency room, even though I should have taken an ambulance, but I didn’t want that bill. And now the bill from the hospital stay, the bill from being admitted, and the doctor’s bill, which is all separate.”

Ms. Bush, 43, doesn’t have health insurance. She is also a candidate for Congress, trying for the second time to defeat Representative William Lacy Clay of Missouri, a 10-term incumbent, in a Democratic primary. She is one of several Democratic congressional candidates who gave up their employer-sponsored insurance when they decided to run for office, and whose platforms include expanding access to health care.

The choice between keeping their own health insurance or trying to help others get such coverage wasn’t one they made lightly. Now, with the coronavirus outbreak putting electoral politics on pause across the country, they must take extra care to protect their health as they fight to maintain momentum around their campaigns.

“It’s a difficult balance, and I have to be real with you, it’s a little scary, because I want to be out there,” said Samelys López, 40, who is running in a crowded Democratic primary in New York’s 15th District and is seeking to succeed her former boss, Representative José E. Serrano, who is retiring.

“What if something does happen to me?” she said. “I have to be even more vigilant because I don’t have health insurance at the moment. And I think that is the reason we need to make the case for universal health care. We should have these things as a human right — I shouldn’t have had to make that choice.”

Nabilah Islam, one of several Democrats running to replace Representative Rob Woodall, a retiring Republican, in a district north of Atlanta, has not had insurance since 2018.

“It was something that I forwent because running for office is cost-prohibitive, and it’s expensive to pay for health care,” she said. “I can’t even qualify for Medicaid, even if I wanted to.”

Georgia is one of 14 states that have not expanded Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, and Ms. Islam is one of more than 100,000 people in her district who are uninsured.

“God forbid I do get the virus,” Ms. Islam, 30, said. “I would go into medical debt, and that’s not just me, that’s over 20 percent of my district.”

As expensive as it can be to run for office, candidates without health insurance face even greater financial risks, since an unexpected ambulance ride or emergency room visit could put them thousands of dollars in debt.

Ms. Islam lost her insurance in 2018, when she left her job as the Southern states finance director at the Democratic National Committee. She bought a flimsy off-market plan the next year, while she was working with local campaigns in Georgia. But now that she’s running herself, she has no protections at all.

“When you run for office, you can’t do this part time. The deck is stacked against you if you do it part-time,” she said. “And if you are a wealthier person, you have the advantages of not really having to worry about health insurance. You’re able to run more freely.”

The prospect of going without health insurance, pandemic or not, can deter people from running for office, particularly those who are political outsiders.

“It’s one of these additional barriers for candidates who are working class,” said Hannah Nayowith, who served as campaign manager for Jessica Cisneros, who narrowly lost a primary race last month to unseat Representative Henry Cuellar, Democrat of Texas.

Ms. Cisneros ran a grass-roots campaign while uninsured, even though she provided insurance for her full-time staff. There were times she had to cross the border into Mexico for procedures and medication, because they were more affordable there.

Ms. Nayowith noted that the Democratic Party has often called for greater representation by candidates of color and working-class people. But many of those people are less likely to have health insurance.

“For folks that look like the kind of candidates that we want in this new era of politics,” she said, “it makes it even harder for them to do it.”

“The system wasn’t designed to elect people like me: working people, women of color,” Ms. Islam said. “And one of those structural barriers is health care.”

When Ms. Bush decided to run for a second time, it was hard for her to leave her job as a nurse in a community health clinic, particularly because she is a single parent of two children. In fact, she had planned to keep working until her campaign got off the ground.

“I was going to work for several months and then take off later in the race. It just didn’t end up happening that way,” she said. “It’s hard to keep a job or find a job when you’re running against a Democratic incumbent.”

She is doing her best to keep her campaign going while she recovers from pneumonia, staying present on social media until she feels healthy enough to become more active.

“We structured our campaign to where it continues to roll even when I’m sick,” Ms. Bush said. “We will be able to make it day by day. But once I’m back, I’m back.”

Ms. López, who was once homeless herself, left her job at a nonprofit group that builds housing for the homeless in order to run.

She mulled the decision for months, and the prospect of losing her health insurance and her income was one reason it took so long to make up her mind. She had some savings, enabling her to take the leap, but she said that money would run out soon.

Right now, she said, her focus is on helping people in her Bronx district, where many people live in poverty and which has been hit particularly hard by the coronavirus. As her entire campaign operation moved online, she began using her network of volunteers not only to phone and text bank but also to try to get resources and supplies to those who needed them.

She’s currently staying isolated, since she knows her health is directly related to the well-being of her campaign.

“I feel like I’m being penalized,” Ms. López said. “Just because we make a decision to be in public service and give back, doesn’t mean that we should be choosing between life, death and illness.”

Candidates who don’t have health care are often unable to provide insurance to their employees as well, leaving multiple layers of their campaigns vulnerable during a pandemic.

“We aren’t able to raise the funds to be able to be able to pay a salary and have health insurance,” Ms. Bush said. “It was something that we really wanted to be able to do.”

Isra Allison, Ms. Bush’s campaign manager, has worked for a string of grass-roots campaigns and, as a result, hasn’t had health insurance in four years.

“Having access to universal health care will give people more of the opportunity to plug in to a grass-roots campaign if it’s something that they’re passionate about,” she said.

Ms. Islam petitioned the Federal Election Commission in early January to be able to use campaign funds to pay for health insurance, seeking to level the playing field for candidates like her.

“I believe that if you’re on the campaign trail, you should be able to have health care,” Ms. Islam said. “Especially during a pandemic.”

She said she still hadn’t heard back.

<|endoftext|>

[For the latest updates, visit Tuesday’s changing lives briefing.]

Perhaps you didn’t think to observe it last year. This year, as the coronavirus pandemic has sickened nearly 800,000 worldwide, people are wholeheartedly making sure they thank a nearby medical professional on National Doctor’s Day. 

International Nurse’s Day is observed on May 12, so you have time to do some (online) shopping. 

Thanks to all the great doctors, nurses, and other #healthcare professionals taking such good care of me here at @NYUlangone. #COVID19 #Covid_19 #NationalDoctorsDay https://t.co/5DGaXpTOij

Do you know what the one thing doctors want from you for their big day? Yup: For you to stay home.

Does a global pandemic warrant letting every college student pass, or even get an A, in every class?

Some of the hardest schools in America — M.I.T., New York University School of Law, the University of Chicago — were having this debate while the coronavirus raged across the country with students following orders to vacate their dorms, and professors switching to Zoom classes, often clumsily.

Some students demanded that they go further than pass/fail and switch to “universal pass.”

From a New York University law student’s email to fellow students:

“As I said, I’m a 3L and I had serious doubts about my own efficacy as a student this semester before covid-19 even started (lol), but zoom classes? Call me skeptical I just don’t think they’re going to be that productive a use of my time during a global pandemic. You know? Call me crazy. This is not to knock online schools/schooling AT ALL; I’m not trying to be elitist here, just honest about whether or not this is really going to be productive for students who are probably frayed to bits. My heart goes out to any student who is having serious anxiety re: exams/health/pandemic.”

But like a good future lawyer, the student could see — and argue — the other side. And N.Y.U.’s cutthroat reputation notwithstanding, the student offered to be generous.

“THOUGH I do absolutely empathize/sympathize with those underclassmen (and women and neutral genders) who needed this semester to pull their grades up, man do I vibe with that struggle,” the student said, offering to share notes from courses like “evidence,” “crim pro” and “law of democracy” with other students who needed them.

“Even though I may not know you I encourage you to think of me as a resource if you need someone. Times like this pulling together is really required of communities like ours,” the student wrote.

On a University of Chicago Facebook thread, some students advocated following in the footsteps of M.I.T., which was one of the first universities to switch to a pass-fail system because of the virus.

But there was a voice of caution:

Not to rain on the parade, but P/F is also much more institutionally OK at MIT (all first year classes are P/F, to allow people to acclimate to college). So I’m not saying it’s impossible to do, could be HUGE for the program, but also the institutional view on P/F is very different.

Another Chicago student brought up the problem of students who really did need the grades they expected to earn.

“Some students might have low GPAs that they’re looking to increase, which they wouldn’t be able to do under a P/F policy — something to keep in mind.”

A third student interjected that in these extraordinary times, professors might be more flexible than usual:

“I strongly suspect it won’t be hard to get Profs who just give wall to wall As in the spring …? Probably not in certain departments (we all know who I’m talking about), but I genuinely think it’s likely most Professors are more willing to grade inflate everyone.”

Tellingly, there is a precedent for that last student’s theory.

Patrick Healy, then a reporter with The Boston Globe and now the editor of the politics desk of The New York Times, wrote a story in 2001 recounting how some historians trace grade inflation at Harvard to the War in Vietnam.

“Students realized they needed evidence to show they weren’t just messing around in college to avoid the draft,” George Flynn, a historian and author of “The Draft, 1940-1973,” told Mr. Healy.

“The war just set off inflation at Harvard,” Henry Rosovsky, who joined the economics faculty in 1965, was quoted as saying. “Professors gave higher grades to protect them.”

In case you were wondering, N.Y.U. Law announced last Wednesday that it was adopting a Credit/Fail grading policy for all Spring 2020 semester courses. The announcement to students admitted that the policy could come at a cost to “incentives and fairness,” and urged everyone to try to mitigate those. The announcement read:

Where students are aware that they will receive the same credit for a course almost regardless of their performance, they may not invest significant effort in their work. This is particularly so when a health crisis places other demands on their time and attention. In adopting this shift in grading policy, the Law School faculty are counting on everyone in our community to encourage participation of students who might be disengaged.

The University of Chicago has yet to announce any changes.

Before she left Spain, Deb Monti, a 22-year-old painter, started making pieces of life under lockdown. In one painting, two people stand on a balcony, sharing a cigarette. In another, a girl’s face is segmented by a window, trapping her indoors.

“It’s so all-of-a-sudden,” Ms. Monti said. “It makes me feel so suffocated and restrained.”

Across the world, many people are confined to their homes as the pandemic sweeps by outside, and sometimes inside. Many are keeping diaries in both words and pictures: pantry inventories, window views, questions about the future, concerns about the present. Taken together, the pages tell the story of an anxious, claustrophobic world on pause.

When future historians look to write the story of life during coronavirus, these first-person accounts may prove useful. Because history isn’t usually told by the bigwigs of the era, even if they are some of its main characters. Instead, it is often reconstructed from snapshots of ordinary lives. In today’s diaries, anxiety is constant.

For people without imminent serious health or financial challenges, who are “merely” dealing with the anxieties of a global pandemic, worldwide financial domino effects and the illnesses of friends and co-workers, there’s a lot of time at home. Staying at home is the number one request medical providers are making of those of us privileged enough to not need to travel for work. (And it seems to be working.)

Proponents of the productivity industry would like the healthy homebound of us to learn Greek, advanced baking and sewing and also maybe clean your entire house while home schooling your children and putting in vegetable beds for spring and also maybe washing up our baby lambs.

But here in the real world … there’s a lot of Xbox (as noted by Stan Wawrinka, the tennis champ) and frozen pizzas and Netflix. Hence the “quarantine routine,” a joke format about how we’re spending our days at home. There’s a lot of sincere suggestions for daily at-home routines out there — we think the “quarantine routine” started in sincerity here, as a way of helping people think about how to manage their time. Those helpful tips were quickly replaced by something more relatable.

From here it has not gotten more reasonable.

Experts say structure really helps bring meaning to your days! Also you gotta only do what you can.

You’ll be unsurprised to hear that people are buying more things they need, and less things they don’t. Target released a report this week, saying that, in March, it saw a 50 percent jump for essentials and food and beverages, but a downturn in things like accessories.

That’s likely why, earlier today, Macy’s announced it had lost the “majority” of its sales — and was going to furlough around 130,000 workers.

So most “nonessential” retailers, like people who sell you clothes, are viewing their digital businesses as a lifeline. On Instagram, that means you’re seeing a lot of ads for weighted blankets — but also lots of work-from-home styles and designer sweatsuits.

On Monday, Anthropologie’s website asked customers to “invite color inside” by shopping the “cozy-at-home edit.” Macy’s encouraged customers to“recharge in new ways” with its “stay-at-home essentials.” Discounts seem prevalent across sites, though many warn of potential shipping delays based on the virus. Anthropologie also found a “date-night-at-home” outfit for their Instagram.

Foster requests at one shelter in Kansas City, Mo., went from an average of 10 a day to 250 a day; in Dallas, foster animal placement was up ten times over last year.

And it’s not just cats and dogs that people are taking in. “People are panic-buying chickens like they did toilet paper,” a president of one chicken hatchery told us, as egg shortfalls were reported in supermarkets.

Animal shelters grew increasingly desperate over the last week to place animals, according to NPR. Without adoption fairs, and without staff in some cases, shelters are struggling to respond to kitten and puppy season. Flatbush Cats, a foster group in Brooklyn, wrote on Instagram they were concerned about the coming “huge spike in kittens born on the street just a few weeks from now, as spay/neuter clinics across the country remain closed.”

Over the last few decades, animal rescue organizations have begun transporting an enormous amount of animals, mostly dogs and cats, from U.S. states with kill shelters to states with more adopters and no animal euthanasia. (International transport has also increased, with dogs coming to the U.S. from Russia, China, Mexico and others.)

The coronavirus pandemic will, presumably, end. But chicken and cat parenthood is a lifetime.

The Backstreet Boys put on a concert last night.

They sang “I Want It That Way,” and maybe they were just a little rusty in spots — it’s been more than two decades since the song’s original release.

The boys weren’t together, of course. Brian was in his living room in Atlanta. Nick was by a pool in Las Vegas. Kevin was backed by his two young sons, one on the drums and the other strumming a small guitar, at his home in Los Angeles.

They were among dozens of entertainers and artists — including Billie Eilish, Alicia Keys, H.E.R., Ellen DeGeneres, Lizzo and Dave Grohl — who performed songs and recorded messages for iHeartRadio’s Living Room Concert for America on Sunday evening. It was broadcast on Fox and streamed on YouTube.

The concert was like a modern version of the old-school telethon, benefiting two organizations: Feeding America, a national network of food banks, and the First Responders Children’s Foundation, which supports the families of emergency medical workers dealing with financial hardship because of the coronavirus.

Some of the celebrities appeared in sweatpants or pajamas, dispensing advice about social isolation from their outdoor patios or on living room couches. Tim McGraw, in bluejeans, sang while straddling a diving board over a backyard swimming pool. Mariah Carey set up shop in her home studio, with background singers and a pianist video-conferenced in.

“The most inspirational thing about this situation is watching everyone join forces and lift each other up,” said Elton John, who hosted the video event.

“I’d play a song myself, but I happen to be quarantined in the only house I’ve ever been in without a piano,” he said.

With plenty of time on their hands as a result of stay-at-home orders, entertainers of all kinds have tried to help during the pandemic. From the singer Liam Gallagher reworking the songs of Oasis into hand-washing anthems to the actress Gal Gadot’s polarizing “Imagine” video, there has been no shortage of options for people looking for a potentially helpful distraction.

Enter Samantha Newark, the original voice of Jem from the cartoon “Jem and the Holograms.” Her public-service announcement from late last week, in which she warns about bogus medications and encourages social distancing and hand-washing, will help us defeat the coronavirus. Jem’s rival band, The Misfits, has yet to weigh in either way.

In a revealing look at how tight-knit the New York City basketball community is, and how devastating the coronavirus can be, Marc Stein and John Branch reported on a birthday party for a former St. Johns player that has left three people dead and multiple other people having tested positive for Covid-19.

The party, which was being held for David Cain, included people who had played at all levels of New York basketball — including Steve Burtt Sr., a former N.B.A. player, who talked about putting the pieces together of having attended a party that resulted in Lee Green, a teammate of Cain’s at St. Johns, and two others dying.

“We were just out having a good time,” Burtt said. “When I got wind of it, I called Dave to check on him, but I didn’t put two and two together. And then Lee died. I’m like: ‘Wait a minute — they said he was at a party. I was at the party.’”

Marc Stein discussed how the story of David Cain’s birthday party came together and the challenges that reporters — particularly sports reporters — are facing in a changing era.

How much of a challenge was it to coordinate the reporting of this story with the two of you in different states?

Stein: The reality for reporters right now, like it or not, is that much of our reporting has to be done by phone, text, WhatsApp, social media channels, etc. All stories are better when the reporting can be done face to face and on the scene, but it’s just not possible at the moment.

You both are used to spending a lot of time with your subjects and digging really deep into things. How much of a challenge was that in this case?

Stein: Speaking strictly for me, even in a season as rife with downbeat stories as this 2019-20 N.B.A. campaign has been, this whole story was out of the norm for me. Not only because we were writing about a community outside of my usual N.B.A. bubble but because the subject matter was so heavy.

It was a basketball story, but let’s face it: It was about much bigger real-world stuff.

With sports shelved for the time being, there seems to be a real challenge ahead for sports reporters. How does your mind-set to storytelling change and adapt to something like this?

Stein: Since my day-to-day beat is the N.B.A. and given the widespread interest in all the ways that Covid-19 is disrupting this ascendant league right when it anticipated moving into playoff mode, there hasn’t been anything close to a shortage of story ideas yet.

Panic buying has left stores and diaper banks empty of baby essentials as shutdowns and quarantines expand across the country.

As Americans pitch in to order meals for beleaguered health care workers, the deliveries can be a lifeline for restaurants and food trucks as well as hospitals.

“You always live in fear that you’re never going to wake up.” What one medical professional learned after being the first confirmed coronavirus patient in New Jersey.

Reporting was contributed by Jacey Fortin, Anemona Hartocollis, Sapna Maheshwari, Amelia Nierenberg, Choire Sicha and Benjamin Hoffman.

<|endoftext|>

As hospitals across the country brace for an onslaught of coronavirus patients, doctors, nurses and other health care workers — even in emerging hot spots — are being furloughed, reassigned or told they must take pay cuts.

The job cuts, which stretch from Massachusetts to Nevada, are a new and possibly urgent problem for a business-oriented health care system whose hospitals must earn revenue even in a national crisis. Hospitals large and small have canceled many elective services — often under state government orders — as they prepare for the virus, sending revenues plummeting.

That has left trained health care workers sidelined, even in areas around Detroit and Washington, where infection rates are climbing, and even as hard-hit hospitals are pleading for help.

“I’m 46. I’ve never been on unemployment in my life,” said Casey Cox, who three weeks ago worked two jobs, one conducting sleep research at the University of Michigan and another as a technician at the St. Joseph Mercy Chelsea Hospital near Ann Arbor, Mich. Within a week, he had lost both.

Mayor Bill de Blasio of New York has begged doctors and other medical workers from around the country to come to the city to help in areas where the coronavirus is overwhelming hospitals.

“Unless there is a national effort to enlist doctors, nurses, hospital workers of all kinds and get them where they are needed most in the country in time, I don’t see, honestly, how we’re going to have the professionals we need to get through this crisis,” Mr. de Blasio said Friday morning on MSNBC.

And the Department of Veterans Affairs is scrambling to hire health care workers for its government-run hospitals, especially in hard-hit New Orleans and Detroit, where many staff members have fallen ill. The department moved to get a federal waiver to hire retired medical workers to beef up staff levels.

But even as some hospitals are straining to handle the influx of coronavirus patients, empty hospital beds elsewhere carry their own burden.

“We’re in trouble,” said Gene Morreale, the chief executive of Oneida Health Hospital in upstate New York, which has not yet seen a surge in coronavirus patients.

Governors in dozens of states have delivered executive orders or guidelines directing hospitals to stop nonurgent procedures and surgeries to various degrees. Last month, the United States surgeon general, Dr. Jerome M. Adams, also implored hospitals to halt elective procedures.

That has left many health systems struggling to survive.

Next week, Mr. Morreale said, Oneida will announce that it is putting 25 percent to 30 percent of its employees on involuntary furlough. They will have access to their health insurance through June. Physicians and senior staff at the hospital have taken a 20 percent pay cut.

“We’ve been here 121 years, and I’m hoping we’re still there on the other side of this,” Mr. Morreale said.

Appalachian Regional Healthcare, a 13-hospital system in eastern Kentucky and southern West Virginia, has seen a 30 percent decrease in its overall business because of a decline in patient volume and services related to the pandemic. Last week, the hospital system announced it would furlough about 8 percent of its work force — around 500 employees.

Hospital executives across the country are cutting pay while also trying to repurpose employees for other jobs.

At Intermountain Healthcare, which operates 215 clinics and 24 hospitals in Utah, Idaho and Nevada, about 600 of the 2,600 physicians, physicians assistants and registered nurses who are compensated based on volume will see their pay dip by about 15 percent, but many will be able to supplement by deploying to other areas, said Daron Cowley, a company spokesman.

Those reductions are tied to the drop in procedures, which has fallen significantly for some specialties, he said. The organization is working to preserve employment as much as possible, in part by trying to deploy 3,000 staff members into new roles.

“You have an endoscopy tech right now that may be deployed to be at hospital entrances” where they would take the temperatures of people coming in, Mr. Cowley explained.

In Boston, a spokesman for Partners HealthCare, with 12 hospitals, including Massachusetts General and Brigham and Women’s, said staff members whose work has decreased are being deployed to other areas or will be paid for up to eight weeks if no work is available.

But redeployment is not always an option. Janet Conway, a spokeswoman for Cape Fear Valley Health System in Fayetteville, N.C., said many of the company’s operating room nurses trained in specialized procedures have been furloughed because their training did not translate to other roles.

“Those O.R. nurses, many have never worked as a floor nurse,” she said.

Ms. Conway said nearly 300 furloughed staff members have the option to use their paid time off, but beyond that, the furlough would be unpaid. Most employees are afforded 25 days per year.

Some furloughed hospital workers are likely to be asked to return as the number of coronavirus cases rise in their communities. But the unpredictable virus has offered little clarity and left hospitals, like much of the economy, in a free fall.

Many health systems are making direct cuts to their payrolls, eliminating or shrinking performance bonuses and prorating paychecks to mirror reduced workload until operations stabilize.

Scott Weavil, a lawyer in California who counsels physicians and other health care workers on employment contracts, said he was hearing from doctors across the country who were being asked to take pay cuts of 20 to 70 percent.

The requests are coming from hospital administrators or private physician groups hired by the hospitals, he said, and are essentially new contracts that doctors are being asked to sign.

Many of the contracts do not say when the cuts might end, and are mostly affecting doctors who are not treating coronavirus patients on the front lines, such as urologists, rheumatologists, bariatric surgeons, obstetricians and gynecologists.

Such doctors are still being asked to work — often in a decreased capacity — yet may be risking their health going into hospitals and clinics.

“It’s just not sitting well,” Mr. Weavil said, noting that he tells doctors they unfortunately have few options if they want to work for their institution long term.

“If you fight this pay cut, administration could write your name down and remember that forever,” he said he tells them.

In other cases, physicians are continuing to find opportunities to practice in a more limited capacity, like telemedicine appointments. But that has not eliminated steep pay cuts.

“Physicians are only paid in our clinic based on their productivity in the work they do,” said Dr. Pam Cutler, the president of Western Montana Clinic in Missoula. “So they’re automatically taking a very significant — usually greater than 50 or 75 percent — pay cut just because they don’t have any work.”

In some areas, layoffs have left behind health care workers who worry that they will not be able to find new roles or redeploy their skills.

Mr. Cox in Michigan said he was briefly reassigned at his hospital, helping screen and process patients coming in with coronavirus symptoms, but eventually the people seeking reassignments outgrew the number of roles.

He also expressed concern that inevitable changes in the health care industry after the pandemic — paired with the possibility of a lengthy period of unemployment — could make it difficult to get his job back.

“I’m just concerned that the job I got laid off from may not be there when this is over,” Mr. Cox said. “The longer you’re away, the more you worry, ‘Am I going to be able to come back?’ So there’s a lot of anxiety about it.”

Even as many of the largest hospital networks grapple with sudden financial uncertainty, much smaller practices and clinics face a more immediate threat.

According to a statistical model produced by HealthLandscape and the American Academy of Family Physicians, by the end of April, nearly 20,000 family physicians could be fully out of work, underemployed or reassigned elsewhere, particularly as cities like New York consider large-scale, emergency reassignments of physicians.

“Many of these smaller practices were living on a financial edge to start with, so they’re not entering into this in a good position at all,” said Dr. Gary Price, the president of the Physicians Foundation. “Their margins are narrower, their patients don’t want to come in, and many of them shouldn’t anyway, so their cash flow has been severely impacted and their overhead really hasn’t.”

Patricia Cohen and Jennifer Steinhauer contributed reporting.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — This was the year the Census Bureau was primed for a gargantuan task — remaking the census of nearly 330 million Americans for the digital age at a time of enormous national division and obstacles to an accurate count.

Then came the coronavirus.

Early indications are that the first part of the process — getting as many Americans as possible to respond via the census website, by mail or by phone — has gone well.

But the severe virus-related limitations on mobility and personal contact have completely upended a decade of planning how to accurately count those who do not reply on their own and particularly difficult to reach portions of the population. Fair political representation and billions of federal dollars are riding on the result.

Wednesday, April 1, is census day, the official beginning of the decennial count that began 230 years ago. Below are questions and answers about this year’s particular challenges and more.

Census day is mostly a way to draw attention to the census and its importance. Nearly all households have already received instructions on how to complete the form. But April 1 is also a fundamental marker — the bureau’s mandate is to count everyone who is a member of a household on that day, including often-overlooked people like small children, boarders and relatives.

Households that fail to complete the 12-question form will get periodic postcard nudges, and those that have not responded by mid-April will be mailed paper forms. Census takers are scheduled to start tracking down those who ignore the reminders on May 27. Responding is required by federal law; those who do not can be fined $100, but the bureau says no fines have been levied since the 1970s.

About 38 percent of households have responded since the online portal opened on March 10, a number in line with the bureau’s projections. If you would like to see how your state, city or neighborhood is doing, the Census Bureau is tracking responses daily, and the City University of New York is publishing maps that offer an even more granular breakdown.

Other aspects of the count, though, are facing unexpected obstacles. Already, a multi-day nationwide count of roughly a half-million homeless people has been put off. Processing of mailed-in census forms has slowed because the bureau shaved its staff at regional centers in Jeffersonville, Ind., and Tuscon, Ariz. And social-distancing cuts in the bureau’s call center work force have slowed down responses to people who want to complete the census by phone or need other kinds of help.

The bureau wants as many households as possible to respond to the census early because tracking down non-responders and persuading them to answer the questionnaire is hugely expensive and difficult. So a massive publicity and public awareness blitz was scheduled to reach out on federal, state and local levels.

But the coronavirus has upended huge parts of that campaign, which envisioned crowded public events centered on the census. Promise Neighborhoods, an Allentown, Pa., group, had to scrap a local basketball tournament that would have drawn hundreds. Chicago is setting up 100 computer kiosks for online census work at gathering points, but pandemic-spooked residents are not gathering to use them. Detroit census organizers canceled 90 public events that were supposed to promote the head count.

Unable to draw crowds or even to knock on doors, census supporters are improvising new ways to drum up response. Detroit plans to enlist 600 neighborhood block groups that will compete to achieve the highest census response. One California group has abandoned its door-to-door campaign and is instead handing out census information at places like food banks. State and local campaigns everywhere have ramped up social media advertising. In Pennsylvania’s Lehigh Valley, a campaign is targeting Hispanic households that are traditionally hard to count by inserting Spanish-language ads in Facebook videos that are reached via Spanish internet addresses.

The Census Bureau has not completely figured that out. The bureau had planned to dispatch hundreds of thousands of census takers to track down tens of millions of households and individuals who fail to respond. The plan was to record their answers to the census questions on specially equipped iPhones. Whether and how that happens depends on if the pandemic ebbs sufficiently to make that sort of door-knocking safe.

Experts say much of that work may be able to be conducted fairly safely, in front-porch interviews that do not require a census taker to enter a household. One unanswered question is whether households that have already ignored repeated requests to fill out the census will even open their doors to strangers in the midst of an epidemic.

The bureau has extended the final deadline for finishing the count by two weeks, to mid-August. Officials say a further extension has not been ruled out — but the further it gets from the publicity of census day, the less likely people are to consider filling out the form, experts say.

Federal law requires the bureau to deliver population totals to the president by Dec. 31; the states will use those totals to reapportion political districts in 2021. But how accurate those totals will be is anything but easy to say.

In 2010, more than 98 percent of households that were sent census forms were tallied by the count’s end — an impressive accomplishment. But the census missed households the bureau did not know existed, some households failed to report everyone who lived there, and not all population groups were counted equally. By the bureau’s own count, the 2010 count missed 16 million people, double-counted 8.5 million and counted another 1.5 million either by mistake or in the wrong place. Minorities and young children were undercounted; non-Hispanic whites were overcounted.

The 2020 census faced a huge task just in addressing those problems, and the pandemic makes the job much more daunting, said Terri Ann Lowenthal, a census expert and consultant to a range of groups seeking an accurate count.

“A successful census is one that counts all communities equally well,” she said. “With the challenges the coronavirus is presenting, I’m worried about the consistency of census operations and level of effort across states and communities.

“And that is a fundamental factor in evaluating not only whether the census is acceptably accurate — but whether it is fair.”

<|endoftext|>

SEATTLE — Once you take in that there are hardly any people around, the quiet hits you.

The street musicians are gone. Jonny Hahn, who rolled his piano around various parts of the Pike Place Market for over 30 years, is nowhere in sight. The boisterous hollers of fishmongers tossing whole salmon to one another and the squeals of delighted tourists watching them work no longer echo through the arcade.

Nonessential businesses were ordered to close soon after Washington State’s “Stay home, stay healthy” mandate went into effect on March 23, an attempt to slow the spread of the coronavirus after the region saw the first explosive outbreak in the United States.

The four owners of the Pike Place Fish Company and their employees now work quietly behind a chain-link curtain that keeps them appropriately distanced from the few customers who still venture out.

“It’s a huge family down here,” Jaison Scott, 48, one of the owners, said of the market. “It was really heartbreaking, watching people in tears, saying ‘I have to close,’ one by one by one.” His mother worked at the company before he was born.

Pike Place Market, opened in 1907, is one of the oldest continuously operated public markets in the United States. The community of more than 500 vendors, and about 500 low-income residents, has weathered tumultuous times before, from the internment of many Japanese-American farmers during World War II through financial difficulties and a threat of demolition.

It is a community with a tradition of watching out for its own. Mike Osborn, 60, owner of Sosio’s Fruit and Produce, said that although business had decreased by about 40 percent, he would not lay anybody off.

“I’ve been here for 47 years — I’m going to be here another 30,” he said. “So why worry about one year? I’m in it for the long haul.”

The dozens of local flower farmers whose riotously colorful blooms normally line table after table during the market’s peak season have been deemed nonessential. So Mr. Osborn has been buying $10 bouquets from the growers and reselling them at his place with a $15 surcharge that he is donating to a program called the Safety Net, set up years ago to help market community members in need.

To ease some of the burden for commercial tenants, the Pike Place Market Preservation and Development Authority provided rent relief for the month of April. A 550-pound bronze piggy bank named Rachel that has been at the market entrance since 1986 collects thousands of dollars annually to help finance the market’s social services.

Mr. Scott of the fish company said he was grateful for the customers who have kept coming: “I think they feel safe coming down here. They say, ‘Oh, I’d rather come here than a grocery store’ because it’s open air. Thank god Federal Express is still going, because they’re picking up our packages every day and shipping them all over the country.”

Lit by the glow from one of the produce stands that remain open, Merrill Maguda, 35, was buying a variety of vegetables. She said she did not like seeing the market so quiet, with so many businesses closed, but “it’s what we need to do at this moment.” “This is my one outdoor adventure every week,” she added, “so I relish it.”

Mr. Osborn said these difficult days are “an opportunity to support a community that has supported you for 110 years.”

Frank Genzale, 72, the owner of Frank’s Quality Produce, whose grandparents sold spinach from their truck at the market in 1929, has been accused of being born right behind Table 47.

“It’s my life,” he said of the market. “You’ve got to love the interaction with the entire world walking by, three feet away from you. A few of us are still here, hanging in there, waiting on our steady customers who stand on the sidewalk and shout out what they want.”

“We’re survivors. The market has seen so many things happen,” he added. “It’s not going to be fun for a while, but yeah, we’ll wake up and say, ‘I’m going to get through today,’ and then we’ll see what tomorrow brings.”

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — From the moment President Trump made his 2016 campaign pledge to start a $1 trillion effort to rebuild the United States’ roads and bridges, infrastructure has become a constant motif of his presidency: his unfulfilled boasts about cutting big bipartisan deals, his quest for distractions from disastrous news cycles and his inability to tackle the nation’s pressing issues.

Democrats have called for a huge infrastructure deal, as well, only to see their hopes for a compromise with Mr. Trump undermined amid squabbling about how to pay for it and derailed by the president’s anger at their investigations of his policies and conduct.

Over the past three years, as the White House’s carefully laid plans for infrastructure-related events have repeatedly been thwarted or overshadowed by the scandal of the day, the phrase “Infrastructure Week” has become something of a joke and a metaphor for any well-intentioned proposal doomed to go nowhere.

But with growing consensus that the coronavirus pandemic could jump-start bipartisan efforts to enact a multitrillion-dollar infrastructure plan to create thousands of jobs, the Trump administration and Congress appear to be taking the issue seriously again.

Here is a timeline of all of the Infrastructure Weeks that could have been.

Mr. Trump said he would spend $800 billion to $1 trillion improving America’s infrastructure, pointing to bridges across the country that were structurally precarious. His proposal was twice as much as what his Democratic opponent, Hillary Clinton, pledged.

Mr. Trump said the infrastructure improvements would be funded by government bonds purchased by investors, a plan liberal economists had pushed for. He promised to fix one bridge in particular — the Brent Spence Bridge in Cincinnati that had long plagued the region with creaks and rust.

At an event in the Rose Garden during the first scheduled infrastructure week, Mr. Trump accused James B. Comey, the F.B.I. director he had fired a month before, of lying under oath during congressional testimony about the investigation into the Trump campaign’s alleged ties to Russia.

During that week, the president also criticized Mayor Sadiq Khan of London for failing to combat terrorism and rebuffed efforts to play down his travel ban barring visitors from predominantly Muslim nations.

Mr. Trump, flanked by members of his administration in the lobby of Trump Tower in Manhattan, offered an update on his infrastructure agenda. But the event turned into a combative question-and-answer session, where the president, asked about a white supremacist attack in Charlottesville, Va., returned to blaming both sides for the deadly violence.

“I think there is blame on both sides,” Mr. Trump said at the time. “You had a group on one side that was bad. You had a group on the other side that was also very violent. Nobody wants to say that. I’ll say it right now.”

A few days after Mr. Trump vowed to tackle infrastructure during his State of the Union address, the administration released a $1.5 trillion infrastructure plan for the next decade — a fraction of which would come from federal investments.

The president said his plan would “spur the biggest and boldest infrastructure investment in American history.” But it faced immediate skepticism on Capitol Hill from both Republicans and Democrats. Independent analysts said the plan would likely not lead to new spending on roads and bridges.

The news of the plan was also overshadowed by the resignation of Rob Porter, then the staff secretary, after two former wives accused him of physical abuse when they were married to him, and the news that Michael D. Cohen, Mr. Trump’s longtime personal lawyer, had paid $130,000 to a pornographic film actress who had once claimed to have had an affair with Mr. Trump.

During the State of the Union address, Mr. Trump called on both political parties to hammer out an infrastructure improvement plan that had made little progress during his first two years in office.

“Both parties should be able to unite for a great rebuilding of America’s crumbling infrastructure,” Mr. Trump said. “This is not an option, this is a necessity.”

With Speaker Nancy Pelosi of California regaining control of the gavel after Democrats won back the House in November 2018, she and other congressional leaders convened at the White House to hammer out a plan for infrastructure.

Democratic congressional leaders emerged afterward and said that Mr. Trump had agreed to pursue a $2 trillion infrastructure plan to upgrade the nation’s highways, railroads, bridges and broadband. They planned to reconvene in three weeks to discuss how to pay for it.

Mr. Trump abruptly ended a follow-up meeting with Democrats in May, declaring that he would not work with them until they stopped investigating him and accusing Ms. Pelosi of a cover-up.

While the president said that it was not possible to work with Democrats during the investigations — “we’re going to go down one track at a time” — the breakdown also gave Democrats evidence to say that Mr. Trump had never been serious about working together on infrastructure.

“I knew he was looking for a way out,” Ms. Pelosi told her colleagues at the time. “We were expecting this.”

House Democrats unveiled their own five-year, $760 billion legislation to rebuild the nation’s highways, airports and other infrastructure as the Senate grappled with the impeachment trial against Mr. Trump.

While the framework included transportation and infrastructure legislation routinely addressed by Congress, Democrats also emphasized efforts to counter the effect of climate change. It was unlikely the Republican-led Senate would take up the legislation without significant changes.

In the final State of the Union address of his term, Mr. Trump called on Congress to take up a Senate highway bill that had passed unanimously out of the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee. That bill authorized $287 billion over five years, and included provisions for road safety and programs to maintain and repair roads and bridges.

After passing three sweeping pieces of legislation to counter the outbreak of the coronavirus pandemic, Democratic and Republican lawmakers, as well as the president, have begun to again raise the possibility of passing a $2 trillion infrastructure package.

<|endoftext|>

When I tell people I flew back to New York City from Hong Kong last weekend, many ask one of two questions.

The first: How long do you have to quarantine? And the second: They must have asked you a lot of questions at the airport, right?

The answer to the first is zero days. In many parts of the world right now — including Greece, Ghana, New Zealand and Hong Kong — anyone arriving from abroad must undergo a mandatory two-week period of isolation to minimize the spread of the coronavirus. In some of these places, if new arrivals are caught even running to the corner store, they may face penalties such as a $3,000 fine or six months in jail.

But in the United States, there is no mandatory 24-7-you-better-not-even-step-outside quarantine for Americans coming from any foreign location, regardless of the status of the outbreak there. Non-Americans from some perceived coronavirus hot spots have been barred from entering altogether. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has some special recommendations for arrivals from these same hot spots. (Hong Kong is not on that list.) And everyone in New York City is currently required to spend most of their time hidden away. But there aren’t any extra rules for people like me who just stepped off an international flight.

The answer to the second question, about what must surely have been a rigorous screening at the airport, is: Let me tell you a story. But it may not end the way you want it to.

It begins with emptiness.

When I arrived at Hong Kong International Airport on the night of March 27, I saw so few passengers that I began to wonder if all flights had been canceled. A few days earlier there had been a rumor that was going to happen.

But, no. The airport bouncers asked for my boarding pass. I think they also zapped my forehead with one of those temperature scanners, but I can’t be certain. After three weeks in Hong Kong, I had stopped noticing when masked strangers took my temperature. It’s that common.

To say the security line was short would be false, because you cannot have a line of just yourself. Once I got past that, the only other “people” I saw were beautiful unmasked Gucci models hugging horses and floating in pools projected across massive screens. (Why would you wear leather gloves in a pool? But this was not a corona-specific issue.)

Everything beyond security — the stores, the duty-free bazaar, the restaurants — was closed.

I had arrived at the airport extra early because I assumed that health policy sleuths would be asking me a bunch of questions to assess how much of a risk I was to society.

My plan had been to get through that and then find something to eat. Since arriving in Hong Kong in early March to help out in The New York Times’s bureau there, I had learned that the city was committed to keeping the food flowing. Even as schools closed, bars closed and the entire population committed itself to wearing masks nearly all the time, the restaurants stayed open, packed with people late into the night.

But I had miscalculated. There was no health policy sleuth awaiting me at the airport, and even the vending machine was empty. I found myself frozen in front of it, listening to its eerie hum, trying to remember which zombie apocalypse movie prominently features a vending machine. (I never figured it out.)

A colleague messaged me that she had heard that the Wing, a lounge operated by the airline Cathay Pacific, was open. I found my way there and learned that yes, it had a fully functioning restaurant inside.

“How much for a lounge pass?”

“It’s invite-only,” the greeter told me.

“There is nowhere else to get food or even buy water in this entire airport,” I told him. “Can’t I just pay?”

“It’s invite only,” he said again, unmoved.

I returned to my gate, where 20 or so people had now appeared. So I was not the only person choosing to leave one part of the world that kind of had the coronavirus under control to fly to another that clearly didn’t.

As I entered the boarding line, a man in a uniform approached me. Had I been to Iran, mainland China or Italy? This was what I had been craving. But too quickly he moved on to the old standards: Had anyone handed me something to put inside my bag? (As if I would have let anyone get that close!)

My nearest neighbor on the flight, a woman in a crinkly oversize poncho, was already obsessively spritzing and wiping her row by the time I sat down. She made me feel safe.

I’m not sure I did the same for her. During my airplane dinner, I accidentally dropped my mask and stepped on it. I did have a backup, but it took me awhile to find it.

Fifteen hours later, I exited the plane in Los Angeles, where a flight attendant handed me a C.D.C. form. There was a section for me to fill out, and a section for “the screener” to check off if I had any signs of being “obviously unwell” and to fill in my temperature. This seemed promising. If they were asking me to go through screening, that most likely meant they were pushing all international arrivals to go through screening.

But the closest I got to a screener was the automated passport control kiosk. I did have two brief encounters with living, breathing humans after that; one wordlessly checked my passport and the other collected the passport kiosk’s photo of me. But neither asked me a single question.

And gauging from the nearby posters, the primary threat facing the nation was still illegal wildlife trafficking.

That was it. That’s how I re-entered America,

As I walked toward the domestic terminal for the next leg of my journey back to New York, I was overwhelmed by all the naked noses and mouths. Even the Delta counter attendants were standing around with their faces hanging out. It had been awhile since I had seen that.

At domestic security, I tried to get away with keeping my shoes on. It didn’t work. “Shouldn’t we be more focused on making sure that people are not transporting a humanity-terrorizing virus than looking for sneaker explosives?” I wanted to say. But not that much.

On my next flight, this one to Atlanta, we learned that there would be no soda or hot beverages — only water — to reduce the flight attendants’ interactions with passengers. OK, here people were making sense. A woman a couple of rows behind me asked if she could move to first class since it was emptier up there. The answer was no. OK, not that much sense.

On my final flight, from Atlanta to New York, I found myself inexplicably compelled to watch “Gilmore Girls,” even though I had never liked the show and didn’t have the right headphone jack. After 20 minutes of silent scenes of small-town, close-contact life, it hit me: People in TV shows rarely touch their faces.

We landed, three flights and 27 hours after my journey home began. When I had dragged my suitcase to the airport on March 9, only 20 confirmed coronavirus cases had been reported in New York City. None had led to death. 

And now, less than three weeks later, New York City had surpassed 32,000 confirmed cases and 670 virus-related deaths. (As of Friday it had risen further to 57,159 cases and 1,867 reported deaths.)

Now that New York City was an epicenter of the outbreak in the United States, surely someone was going to ask me something?! Of course not. I left the airport and made my way home to Brooklyn.

Later that night, I told my wife how disappointed I was by the lack of interrogation.

“What specifically did you want them to ask you?” she asked.

I tried to think of my most critical question: “Might you have come in contact with an infected person?”

“What were you hoping that would accomplish?” she asked.

It was fair criticism given that pretty much everyone’s answer at this point, in Hong Kong and in New York, would be yes.

Further undermining my own need for interrogation, researchers have long said that airport screening for most diseases is pretty useless. The only consistent benefit seems to be the opportunity to collect information for future health sleuthing.

Still, that’s not nothing. Might as well ask us to hand in those C.D.C. forms.

I pulled the wrinkled document out of my bag and read the fine print. At the bottom it listed about 20 destinations. Travelers from these locations were required to fill it out, it said. Hong Kong wasn’t included. So why had anyone bothered to give it to us in the first place?

Maybe, like me, they needed to believe there was something more that could be done.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — Tucked away in the $2 trillion coronavirus stabilization bill is a provision that allows Education Secretary Betsy DeVos to seek congressional approval to waive parts of the federal special education law while schools combat the coronavirus pandemic.

How she might use that authority scares parents like Jennifer Gratzer, who lives in Seattle.

It took a 350-page complaint and hours of work for Ms. Gratzer to get the proper special education services for her 10-year-old son, a nonverbal third grader who has epilepsy and a condition called cortical visual impairment. He has made progress with services like occupational therapy, speech therapy and a one-on-one aid, afforded to special-needs students like him under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act. But Ms. Gratzer fears that Ms. DeVos may relieve her son’s school district of such obligations for the foreseeable future.

“No one wants to do the hard thing unless they’re forced to do it,” Ms. Gratzer said, “and our kids have always been the hard thing.”

With the closure of schools across the country, parents like Ms. Gratzer have found themselves in an educational crisis like none seen since the disabilities law passed in 1975. Today, it grants nearly seven million students individualized instruction and a vast array of educational support and services.

Schools are scrambling to shift classes online as more than 55 million children stay at home. For now, that has upended special education, which is administered through meticulously devised plans called Individualized Education Programs, or I.E.P.s, which require extensive services that are not easily transferred to the internet.

Students who qualify can have moderate to severe disabilities and require a range of support, such as tutoring and behavioral assistance, hands-on services like physical and occupational therapy, and specialized staff. Such services are critical for school districts to comply with IDEA’s mandate that students with special needs receive an education comparable to that of their peers.

The possibility that those obligations could be waived has driven a sharp wedge between school administrators, parents and special education teachers. Administrators and educators say without the waivers they would be forced to meet unrealistic expectations and face costly lawsuits. Avoiding those consequences could mean that districts decide not to offer any education at all to students in the next two months.

“While districts are working on solutions for kids with special needs, they shouldn’t wait to serve everyone else,” Michael J. Petrilli, the president of the Thomas B. Fordham Institute, a conservative research organization, wrote on Twitter.

“The attitude that we need to have is: Let’s do everything we can, as fast as we can, for as many kids as we can,” he later said.

Lee Ann Wentzel, the superintendent of the Ridley School District in Pennsylvania, said her staff had been reviewing thousands of records, connecting with hundreds families and finding creative ways to offer one-on-one services like speech therapy through platforms like Google Hangouts.

But, she conceded, “even with accessibility devices, there are some times when features will come up short for some children.”

“We have to acknowledge the fact that we’re not going to be 100 percent compliant, and not for not trying,” she continued. “But we decided to do what’s best for all kids.”

But parents and special education advocates fear the waivers could mark the beginning of the end of student disability rights.

Ms. Gratzer said she did not expect the same level of services that her son received in school. He could not see let alone follow what was happening on the screen during a recent meeting over Zoom, she said. But she said she hoped to take advantage of a benefit under the virus relief law that required schools to make up for lost time.

“It’s easy to do what they want and steamroll right over our kids,” Ms. Gratzer said. “My fear is that while parents like myself are trying to survive, people like Betsy DeVos will be out there pulling the rug from underneath us.”

The stimulus bill provision gave Ms. DeVos 30 days to submit recommendations for any waivers from the law she believes are necessary. Angela Morabito, an Education Department spokeswoman, said the department was reviewing the congressional request, “and will respond as appropriate.”

“Secretary DeVos has been clear from the beginning that she is committed to ensuring all students, including students with disabilities, can continue their educations during this national emergency,” Ms. Morabito said.

Civil rights organizations say Ms. DeVos does not need to waive provisions to meet that commitment, and doing so could have unintended consequences.

“You’re taking a temporary disadvantage and making it permanent because it will be hard to recoup that learning loss,” said Miriam A. Rollin, the director of the Education Civil Rights Alliance at the National Center for Youth Law. “It really is opening a whole Pandora’s box.”

In a letter, the National Urban League, The Education Trust and other groups said waiver authority for IDEA was “unnecessary.”

The AASA, The School Superintendents Association, disagreed, saying the right to request a waiver from special education mandates was vital when a shutdown district was struggling to meet the basic educational needs of its students.

The organization has asked the Education Department to consider waivers from timelines for evaluating students and for relief from stringent rules for adjusting a student’s individualized education plans.

It also asked for flexibility from rules that govern how schools must respond to due process complaints that parents and lawyers file against districts for failing to provide services. The organization reported that lawyers had already filed complaints in at least four states.

Gregory Molloy, the superintendent of Morrisville-Eaton Central School District in central New York, said the threat of due process complaints had loomed over districts in his region. The school district is reaching out to the parents of special education students to rewrite their individualized plans.

Updated Dec. 18, 2020

The latest on how the pandemic is reshaping education.

But, he said, “how do you deliver a one-to-one aide?” If schools did not, “that’s an easy due process complaint,” he said.

Mr. Molloy said his small, rural school district was still “reeling from the pain that was inflicted” by a case two years ago, when it had to pay between $20,000 to $30,000 in legal fees alone. The damage to the morale of staff accused of failing children was irreparable, he said.

He said he hoped that in addition to waiving timelines and other rules, the Education Department would consider holding schools harmless against any due process complaints.

“What happens four months from now, when we’re back in school and back into a routine, and lawyers are hungry?” Mr. Molloy said. “That empathy that exists for teachers right now, that could evaporate.”

Susan Lee said her 23-year career as a special educator made her a better mother when her daughter began to lose skills like walking and talking by age 3. Her daughter, Alyssa, made her a better teacher, she said, giving her the skills to unlock the potential of students living in a body that does not work for them.

Next week, when Ms. Lee’s school district in Alabama transitions to online instruction, both of her roles will be tested.

She will reconnect with 21 second and third graders, whose federally mandated special education plans call for her to provide seven to eight hours of individualized instruction and a range of behavioral support. But Ms. Lee will also have to juggle instruction for Alyssa, now 12, who cannot hold or manipulate a mobile device because of Rett Syndrome, a rare genetic disorder that has left her completely dependent.

“As much as I wish I could provide every ounce of instruction to my students that is spelled out in their I.E.P.s, it is just not possible,” Ms. Lee said. “How am I able to teach behavioral skills when I can’t be there physically to reinforce it? If I’m teaching a class online and she has a seizure, where does that leave me?”

Ms. Lee said she also had reservations about the potential waivers and hoped that schools did not write off special education students for the rest of the year.

But she also said she hoped the waiver provision would help schools and parents reach a middle ground.

“When you have a child with a disability, we’re told it’s OK to mourn the child we thought we had, and it’s also our opportunity to dream new dreams,” Ms. Lee said. “I think we need to apply that to this situation. It’s OK to mourn the school year that we thought we were going to have.”

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — President Trump has repeatedly assured Americans that the federal government is holding 10,000 ventilators in reserve to ship to the hardest-hit hospitals around the nation as they struggle to keep the most critically ill patients alive.

But what federal officials have neglected to mention is that an additional 2,109 lifesaving devices are unavailable after the contract to maintain the government’s stockpile lapsed late last summer, and a contracting dispute meant that a new firm did not begin its work until late January. By then, the coronavirus crisis was already underway.

The revelation came in response to inquiries to the Department of Health and Human Services after state officials reported that some of the ventilators they received were not operational, stoking speculation that the administration had not kept up with the task of maintaining the stockpile.

In fact, the contract with a company that was maintaining the machines expired at the end of last summer, and a contract protest delayed handing the job to Agiliti, a Minneapolis-based provider of medical equipment services and maintenance. Agiliti was not given the $38 million task until late January, when the scope of the global coronavirus crisis was first becoming clear.

It is not known whether problems with the ventilators predated the contract lapse, but maintenance of the machines did halt. That delay may become a potentially deadly lapse.

“We were given a stop-work order before we’d even started,” said Tom Leonard, the chief executive of Agiliti, which had won the contract to service the ventilators in the stockpile. “Between the time of the original and the time of this contract award, I don’t know who was responsible or if anybody was responsible for those devices. But it was not us.”

Mr. Leonard said confidentiality agreements with the government over the stockpile prohibited him from giving specific figures on the number of ventilators the company was now working on.

“We still have that first tranche of ventilators, although we’re accelerating the work to get them deployable,” Mr. Leonard said. “We haven’t seen or touched or had anything to do with the ones that have already been deployed to date.”

Ventilators are sensitive machinery that Mr. Trump described on Sunday as so complex they were like “building a car.” But, experts say, like a car, they cannot be stored for lengthy periods without maintenance. So few are surprised that as the nation’s hospitals scramble to pull together every usable ventilator they can find, some have come out of storage with depleted batteries, missing oxygen hoses and other issues.

California recently discovered that 170 of its ventilators arrived broken, disputing the claim from the Department of Health and Human Services that all of the ventilators shipped by the Federal Emergency Management Agency were ready to use. The agency said in a statement that problems with some ventilators were limited to the devices’ external batteries, and that federal officials were quick to assist the states with any technical issues.

Federal officials revealed on Wednesday that their stockpile of medical gear was nearly depleted. FEMA has shipped 26 million surgical masks, 11.6 million respirator masks and more than five million face shields to states, setting off a race to obtain millions of recently produced masks from a variety of manufacturers at a moment of huge price spikes for respirators that previously sold for about 85 cents.

The bigger struggle, however, has focused on ventilators because states have asked for tens of thousands more than the approximately 9,400 that the U.S. government currently has in its stockpile. The Defense Department is also making 1,065 ventilators available, although those require special training and are not used as frequently in hospitals.

As White House officials have for the first time looked at a supply they had not thought about, they have discovered it is not only far smaller than what they need — it is also in constant need of maintenance.

Aric Vacchiano, the vice president of U.S. sales and services at Vyaire Medical in Chicago, which produces the LTV 1200, one of the ventilators in the federal stockpile, said the company had been fielding calls from all over the country as hospital officials rushed to get the machines in working order.

“They’re reaching out in every direction,” Mr. Vacchiano said.

Vyaire was responsible for maintaining some of the ventilators in the federal stockpile until that contract ran out in late August. The company protested when a broader contract to keep the stockpile up-to-date was granted to Agiliti instead. The dispute was not resolved until January, when Agiliti again prevailed.

It then received thousands of ventilators — it would not say how many — for restoration, and that work is still underway.

A spokeswoman for Health and Human Services did not respond to questions about what had happened to ventilator maintenance during the lapse, but she said the agency had sped up the contract with Agiliti to make the remaining 2,109 ventilators available by April 30.

As of Wednesday morning, FEMA had sent about 7,000 ventilators to a number of states, with 4,000 directed to New York. Mr. Trump said he wanted to hold the current stockpile in reserve until it was clear where new hot spots would emerge.

Even with the federal help, states are scrambling for their own ventilators. They have flooded the few manufacturers in the country with orders, only to discover that the machines are largely made abroad, in China, Ireland, Switzerland and elsewhere.

“We’re very short,” Gov. Ned Lamont of Connecticut said on CNN on Monday. “We had our ventilators all set to come, and at the last moment FEMA redirected them,” he said, to “another place that they considered more urgent than Connecticut.”

Officials in Illinois say they asked for 4,000 and got 450. New Jersey sought 2,300 and got 300. New Mexico has only 370. Virginia requested 350 ventilators but has not received any. The governor of Illinois asked Vice President Mike Pence for 4,000 ventilators this week and was told the state would not need that many.

At the same time, states are trying to grab whatever else they can, converting anesthesia machines for use as ventilators and sometimes fashioning new valves on 3-D printers so that multiple patients can share the same machine. That has never been tested on a broad scale, and it carries some risks.

To manage the scarcity of ventilators in the stockpile, FEMA has begun sending a questionnaire to states seeking ventilators, asking about available resources and whether hospitals have tried converting anesthesia machines. A FEMA official said state leaders could submit requests for ventilators at any time but should not expect their delivery unless patients were at risk of dying within 72 hours without the devices.

And states are discovering that much of what they can get their hands on needs work.

“Devices are being deployed, and many times it’s not clear to us whether they’re from the Strategic National Stockpile or some cache of products that may have been from that specific hospital, from that specific state or maybe another entity locally,” Mr. Vacchiano said. “In many cases, especially in places like New York, we are definitely overnighting materials to step up to the plate and try to help.”

He estimated that 80 percent or more of the calls that Vyaire has received have come from the greater New York area.

“We’re not hearing or seeing units showing up being truly or fundamentally broken,” Mr. Vacchiano said. But, he conceded, “they probably have not been maintained.”

Jonathan Martin contributed reporting from Washington. Kitty Bennett contributed research.

<|endoftext|>

A surge in coronavirus deaths in the United States has prompted the vast majority of governors to order their residents to stay home, but a small number of states are resisting increasingly urgent calls to shut down.

The pressure on the holdouts in the Midwest and the South has mounted in recent days as fellow governors, public-health experts and even their own citizens urge them to adopt tougher measures that have been put in place across 41 states and Washington, D.C.

Health experts warn that the coronavirus can easily exploit any gaps in a state-by-state patchwork of social distancing in the country, where the death toll climbed past 6,600 on Friday.

“I just don’t understand why we’re not doing that,” Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the nation’s leading expert on infectious diseases, said on CNN. “We really should be.”

By Friday, nine states had yet to issue formal statewide stay-at-home orders. It is the most direct, stringent measure available, going beyond closing down restaurants and schools and instructing all residents to stay at home, except for necessities. In some of those states, cities and counties had stepped in to issue their own orders, leaving a patchwork of restrictions.

The contrast is the starkest in five states — Arkansas, Iowa, Nebraska, North Dakota and South Dakota — where there are no such orders in place, either in major cities or statewide. Another four had partial restrictions issued locally in certain cities or counties.

In an attempt to stop the spread of the coronavirus, a vast majority of states and the Navajo Nation have given directives, affecting more than nine in 10 U.S. residents.

In interviews and at news conferences this week, the governors in the holdout states defended their decision, saying that they had already taken strong steps — closing schools, and shutting down or limiting many aspects of public life, including restaurants, bars, gyms, bowling alleys and movie theaters.

“I can’t lock the state down,” said Gov. Kim Reynolds of Iowa, which has recorded more than 600 confirmed cases and at least 11 deaths. “People also have to be responsible for themselves.”

For many conservative governors who believe strongly in small government and personal responsibility, the prospect of mandatory stay-at-home orders is anathema and they rejected what they called a catchall approach that could wreck their states’ economies. Though governors issuing the orders elsewhere have spanned the political spectrum, with some Republican governors emerging as early and strong advocates, the remaining holdout states are all Republican-led.

Gov. Doug Burgum of North Dakota said he was appealing to residents “who love liberty and freedom” to respect social-distancing rules. “It’s important that we exercise individual responsibility,” he said at a news conference. “By following these guidelines, we’re literally saving lives.”

Some holdout governors have issued different levels of restrictions within their states. Iowa has adopted a point system to determine whether particular parts of the state should be ordered to shelter in place. In Nebraska, restaurants in more rural areas were still open for customers to eat-in — as long as there were fewer than 10 at a time.

Other states with partial restrictions in cities or counties, but no statewide orders, included Oklahoma, South Carolina, Utah and Wyoming.

Gov. Greg Abbott of Texas had previously toughened social-distancing guidelines, but stopped short of calling the move a statewide stay-at-home order; on Friday, a spokesman clarified that Texas was indeed under a statewide mandate. Also on Friday, the governors of Missouri and Alabama, who had previously resisted such a move, also issued stay-at-home orders.

“Some will naturally say, why did you wait so long?” Gov. Kay Ivey of Alabama said. “Others will say, why now?” She said she had sought balanced measures that “would look out for people’s safety while keeping government from choking the life out of business and commerce.”

In many of the holdout states — largely rural, with far fewer cases than the hardest-hit regions like New York City — residents said they were already social distancing, even without formal orders.

Still, some feared the lack of clear instructions could leave dangerous gaps.

“If we don’t get some clear directive from our governor, people will begin to rationalize reasons for getting together: ‘It’s not that bad. I see them anyway at the store,’” said Nancy DeBoer, a nurse in Brookings, S.D., home to South Dakota State University. “It’s our governor’s responsibility to show some leadership.”

Gov. Asa Hutchinson of Arkansas said in an interview that the typical stay-at-home order was a misleading “illusion” because it includes so many exemptions allowing people to go out in public, such as for groceries or exercise. He said Arkansas had taken “very aggressive measures,” and said ordering people to stay at home would simply leave thousands jobless.

“If I signed it today, more than 700,000 people would get up and go to work tomorrow,” he said, adding another 100,000 would be suddenly unemployed.

The different approaches have created a rift between states, angering other governors and residents living under stricter orders just across state lines. A Tennessee congressman wrote the governor of Arkansas asking for a stay-at-home order so that the virus did not spread next door.

“What are you waiting for?” Gov. Gavin Newsom of California, who issued the first statewide order last month, told CNN when asked about governors who have not followed suit. “What more evidence do you need? If you think it’s not going to happen to you, there are many proof points all across this country.”

People demanding tougher measures are barraging elected officials with phone calls and social-media messages.

A doctor in Iowa and a registered nurse in South Dakota have started online petitions. In Nebraska, the Facebook page of Gov. Pete Ricketts is filled with commenters second-guessing his decision. “PLEASE issue a stay at home order!” one person wrote. “Very soon it is going to be too late!!”

“We’ve got people begging us,” said Rod Sullivan, the chair of the board of supervisors in Johnson County, Iowa, who said he had gotten calls at home and on his cellphone asking why he had not done more to keep people at home. Under state law, he said, such an order must come from the governor.

“It’s hard to just tell them there’s nothing we can do,” he said.

Many residents said they were taking precautions and social distancing anyway, organizing virtual Bingo games, taking children on “bear hunts” to see teddy bears positioned outside homes or in windows in the neighborhood and organizing car cruise nights, where residents pile in their cars and drive the local strip, waving at each other from a safe distance.

“You end up with some self-governance,” said Michael Stepp, the owner of a tap room and coffee spot in O’Neill, Neb., who said he did not think a statewide order is needed because most residents, like himself, are largely staying home anyway.

“It’s more a result of the general outlook and demeanor of Midwest people,” he said. “Everybody wants to be helpful.”

For some, further restrictions seemed both daunting and unnecessary. Connie Wright is already working out of her home in Altoona, Iowa, coordinating insurance payments for a hospital system. Her gym is closed, so she cannot get out of the house to take Zumba classes and chat with friends she has made there.

The only thing keeping her sane these days, it seems, is walking on the bike trail behind her house and seeing her grandchildren, who still come over to dance to Disney music and songs from the 1960s. She fears that even those small comforts could go away if the governor gives in to what Ms. Wright sees as pressure from critics to issue a stay-at-home order.

“It would be depressing,” said Ms. Wright, 51, who said she appreciated that the governor was showing faith in residents to do the right thing. “You might as well slap an ankle bracelet on me.”

A stretch of Interstate 40, which runs from downtown Memphis across the Mississippi River into Arkansas, has come to illustrate the patchwork of rules restricting movement in the United States. On the Arkansas side of the river, where the governor has resisted a statewide mandate, some “nonessential” businesses remain open. On the Tennessee side, a stay-at-home order went into effect this week, closing stores.

Now, the owner of a chain of clothing stores called Deep South located on both sides of the Mississippi is operating under two different sets of rules. The company’s owner, Munther Awad, a 47-year-old immigrant from the Middle East, said he owned two stores in Arkansas, which are open, one in West Memphis and another in Little Rock. And he owns a third store in Memphis, which is now closed because of a local mandate last week.

“I feel like if you would have just went ahead and put the whole nation at the same time on a lockdown, we could have got some control over it,” said Lavanda Mayfield, 33, who was waiting to serve takeout to customers at the Iron Skillet restaurant at a truck stop near I-40 in West Memphis on Friday.

“But now it’s just out of control,” she said, “because you did state-to-state.”

Reporting was contributed by Audra D.S. Burch, Dionne Searcey, John Peragine, Daniel Connolly, Barbara Hall and Rick Rojas.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — The symptoms were more annoying than alarming: A dry cough, achiness and then sniffles developed a few days after Andrew Young, the American ambassador to Burkina Faso, met with government officials and aid organizations to discuss how to protect the West African nation from the coronavirus.

A week later, Mr. Young was sealed in an isolation chamber and loaded into an evacuation flight out of the capital, Ouagadougou, as the first United States ambassador to learn he had the virus.

He is unlikely to be the last. Already, 154 State Department employees worldwide have tested positive for the virus and more than 3,500 are symptomatic and in self-isolation, the vast majority of them serving in posts overseas.

The pursuit of diplomacy is mostly idealistic, if usually faceless and often thankless. But outside conflict zones, it is rarely deadly. Even the most placid assignments come with security guards and other protective measures.

The coronavirus has changed that.

Diplomats, whose very jobs are to interact with foreigners and to represent 20 million Americans who are abroad at any given time, have been highly vulnerable to the pandemic as it swept around the world and into countries that have been slow to acknowledge its threat, many whose medical facilities are less than adequate to start.

Three State Department employees have died from the coronavirus so far, all of whom were foreign citizens who were hired by the embassies in their respective home nations. One was from Indonesia and another from the Democratic Republic of Congo. The State Department did not disclose on Friday where the third person was from, except to say that he or she was not an American citizen.

On March 20, the day before Mr. Young tested positive, President Trump described the State Department as the “Deep State Department” — a jab at what he sees as a disloyal diplomatic corps. He delivered it during a coronavirus briefing as he stood next to Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, who minutes later said of the president, “I know how much he values the people that work on my team.”

It was left to Representative Eliot L. Engel, the chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, to defend the State Department staff. “These men and women aren’t a ‘deep state,’” Mr. Engel, Democrat of New York, said later. “They’re our leading edge in working to protect Americans in the farthest corners of the world.”

At the start of last week, there were only 43 kits available in Burkina Faso to test for coronavirus infection, Mr. Young said. The country currently has one of the highest numbers of infections in Africa — as of Friday, there were at least 288 confirmed cases and 16 deaths.

Mr. Young was evacuated on March 25 on a flight that was chartered by the State Department to bring him and 120 healthy passengers home from Burkina Faso and Liberia. As soon as the plane landed at Dulles International Airport in the Virginia suburbs of Washington after a 29-hour journey, he was suited up in full biohazard gear and whisked off to a hospital for several days of treatment.

He considers himself lucky. And he wants to return to Burkina Faso as soon as the State Department will let him.

“My treatment is not the same treatment that your average Burkinabe will receive in the coming challenges, because the situation is going to get more difficult in the couple of weeks ahead of us,” Mr. Young said in an interview this week as he recovers at home in the Washington area. “So I carry that.”

So far, the State Department has brought back more than 38,000 citizens and their relatives — many of them tourists, students or Americans who live overseas. That includes about 6,000 diplomats and family members.

Another 22,000 American citizens are still waiting, frustrated by the dwindling number of available flights, foreign regulations and other complications that have slowed their return.

At both ends of the process are American diplomats who either are working abroad to get necessary departure permits from foreign governments, or are part of a Washington-based task force focused on lining up transportation and health services for stranded citizens.

In some cases, that has meant renting buses to pick up Americans in remote locations and take them to the nearest international airport. In others, it has involved negotiating with foreign officials to approve the flights when public airports are closed, or to allow cruise ships with U.S. citizens among infected passengers aboard to dock.

Some State Department employees in Washington have voluntarily reported to the task force operations center, to take over the night shift, after completing their daily diplomatic duties.

“It’s an incredibly fast-paced, fluid challenge,” said Robert W. Forden, the deputy ambassador to the American Embassy in Beijing, who is now running the department’s coronavirus global response team in Washington. “The reaction, the responses have been shifting almost hourly. So it’s a constant struggle.”

It has also put State Department employees at risk of infection.

In Washington, some Foreign Service officers have questioned why they must report for duty at the State Department’s headquarters instead of teleworking, as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has urged most of the nation’s work force. Guidance issued on Wednesday, a copy of which was obtained by The New York Times, requests that State Department employees work from home “unless there is a critical mission need for you to be at the office,” but still allows senior-level supervisors to decide which diplomats qualify.

There are 171 U.S. embassies and 87 consulates around the world; all but two remain open. Those two — consulates in Vladivostok, Russia, and Wuhan, China, where the coronavirus originated — were shuttered this year because of the outbreak.

But 12 other American diplomatic missions are not fully staffed and many officials worldwide have returned to the United States as the pandemic spread. About two-thirds of the diplomats and contractors posted to the United States Embassy in Beijing and Consulates elsewhere in China, for example, have left. Several hundred remain.

Tests for the virus also have been unavailable in some posts to diplomats who worry they could be exposed — putting not just themselves, but also those around them in danger.

“People accept a significant level of risk in this career,” said Eric Rubin, a former ambassador to Bulgaria who is now the president of the union that represents career diplomats. But, he said, there is a need for clear, consistent guidance and the department largely has dealt with the coronavirus “bureau by bureau and post by post.”

None of the U.S. diplomats among the roughly 70 American and Chinese employees at the U.S. Consulate in Wuhan has tested positive for the virus, said Jamie Fouss, the consul general who led its emergency closing on Jan. 28.

A month earlier, diplomats there had become aware of a new, fast-moving virus in Wuhan that attacked the respiratory system, and alerted supervisors at the American Embassy in Beijing in late December. Mr. Fouss said he woke up one morning in mid-January to learn that the airport and some roads in Wuhan were closing, with more to follow in the coming days.

Emergency food supplies were checked; evacuation routes were debated.

Even after the State Department secured a flight to bring home the consulate’s American staff, diplomats had to negotiate with China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs to reopen roads for the drive to the airport. The Chinese government also prohibited any people with Chinese passports from leaving, Mr. Fouss said.

Temperatures were taken before boarding and several times during the long flight home, which landed on Jan. 29 at March Air Reserve Base in Riverside, Calif. The plane was greeted by a C.D.C. officer, who informed all passengers that they would be held there under a 14-day federal quarantine — the first imposed in the United States since the 1960s.

“His hands are shaking, and you can tell he’s very nervous, because he’s expecting this huge uproar from us,” Mr. Fouss said. “And one of my officers said, ‘Well, will you set it up so we can watch the Super Bowl?’ And he said, ‘Yes, I think we can do that.’ And everybody laughed and cheered.”

So far, Mr. Young is the only American employee at the U.S. Embassy in Ouagadougou who has tested positive for the virus, although two local staff members have, and several others have gone into self-quarantine as a precaution.

More than half of the staff and all family members have been evacuated over the last few months, leaving only a few dozen diplomats and other employees. They are all either working from home in Burkina Faso or otherwise maintaining social distance from others.

Although he never ran a fever, his own diagnosis “was a wake-up call that people needed to be really serious about the type of tools that are available to everyone to slow down the spread of the virus,” Mr. Young said.

Over the last week, Mr. Young said, 10,000 coronavirus tests have been donated to Burkina Faso from one of China’s most prominent businessmen, the Alibaba founder Jack Ma. The World Health Organization has sent 2,000 more, he said.

Even before he tested positive, Mr. Young had worried about the virus’s effect on Burkina Faso’s fragile democracy in the middle of a terrorist threat and a growing numbers of refugees. He said he was eager to return.

“I’m working with a really brave population,” he said. “They sacrificed for their democracy and now they are fighting a horrific villain in Al Qaeda and ISIS. And they are stepping up.”

He added, “I want to be part of helping them succeed.”

Catie Edmondson contributed reporting.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — The Democratic National Committee on Thursday postponed its presidential convention because of the coronavirus, moving it from mid-July to mid-August, and making it the largest political event to be upended by the public health crisis sweeping the country.

The convention will still be held in Milwaukee, as planned, the week of Aug. 17, officials said — a week before Republicans plan to gather in Charlotte, N.C., to renominate President Trump. The adjacent dates mean that both parties will be using expert health data from the same time frame to assess the safety of bringing together thousands of people at one event — and, ultimately, deciding whether the benefit of staging the conventions outweighs the medical risks.

The timing sets the stage for a high-stakes test of wills and judgment over the next four months between Mr. Trump and former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., the likely Democratic nominee, as the public health crisis paralyzes the country through the summer. Neither will want to be the first to cancel his convention.

The decision to postpone the Democratic convention was made over the previous two days, officials involved in the planning said, but the issue was amplified Wednesday night by Mr. Biden, who called for rescheduling the convention during an appearance on “The Tonight Show.’’

Tom Perez, the chairman of the Democratic National Committee, said he did not consider moving the event to September, after the Republicans, and was averse to conducting a virtual convention that would be less likely to attract hours of television coverage.

“We’re going to hold a very exciting and safe convention in Wisconsin to highlight our nominee and to make sure that people know the values of the Democratic Party and what we’re fighting for,” he said in a telephone interview.

Advisers to Mr. Biden and senior party leaders stressed Thursday that they remained flexible on the format and that they would be guided by the principle of safety first.

But campaign officials and other Democrats said Mr. Biden’s team also wanted to preserve the prospect of a large, in-person convention whose pageantry and media coverage could provide a boost heading into the final months of the general election.

Mr. Trump has made clear his desire to proceed with plans for a celebratory convention that dominates the airwaves, and Republicans are determined to provide it. That resolve has in turn has put more pressure on Mr. Biden, who was already in need of ways to draw attention from a president with a fearsome bully pulpit. Democrats know that canceling one of their most prominent events could yield a significant advantage Mr. Trump just two months before the election.

Presidential challengers always prize three moments of dayslong publicity — with their vice-presidential selection, their conventions and in the fall debates. That sustained coverage is all the more important now that the virus is likely to keep Mr. Biden off the campaign trail for much of the spring and may substantially condense the general election period.

“There are things you can do online, but there is something about the communal spirit that is important and people feed off of,” said David Axelrod, a senior official in Barack Obama’s presidential campaigns. “From a television standpoint it’s hard to have the same impact if you’re cobbling together a series of remotes.”

Though an in-person convention would provide Mr. Biden a nationally televised boost, the later date carries potential downsides. In addition to potentially keeping Mr. Biden out of the spotlight for an extended period of time, it could complicate his timing on when to announce his vice-presidential choice. And it delays for a month his ability to access funds earmarked for the general election.

Concerns over the virus have already led to the cancellation of hundreds of state and local conventions from both parties. Moving the national convention back a month is an acknowledgment that the outlook for holding an in-person gathering in July — with some 4,500 delegates, and tens of thousands of others who convene on the convention city — was not feasible.

“We welcome the D.N.C.’s decision today to prioritize the health and safety of delegates and the greater Milwaukee community by postponing the Democratic National Convention until August,’’ said Bill Russo, a campaign spokesman, adding that the campaign would continue to work closely with state parties and the D.N.C. “on any changes to the delegate selection process and the format of the convention.”

But there is no guarantee that the crisis will be over by August, and travel could still be difficult or even dangerous for some. One of Mr. Biden’s strongest constituencies is older Americans, the population most vulnerable to the virus, and the lingering effects of the outbreak could still have an effect on which delegates are able to travel.

Dr. Irwin Redlener, a clinical professor at Columbia University’s Mailman School of Public Health, said he was deeply skeptical of a summer convention.

“It is unreasonably optimistic to think that a traditional presidential political convention can happen in the summer of 2020, there’s so much we don’t understand about this,” said Dr. Redlener, who is also the director of the National Center for Disaster Preparedness. He said that gathering large numbers of people together “is counter to every reasonable public health guideline during the pandemic.”

Dr. Redlener was named to Mr. Biden’s public health advisory committee last month, but said he had since stepped aside because of a professional conflict.

Even though other major events scheduled for July had been canceled or postponed, planners had hoped to delay a decision on whether to move the Democratic convention for several more weeks. Mr. Perez told donors as recently as this week that the party had no plans to change the dates, according to people familiar with the conversations.

But Mr. Biden has been receiving extensive briefings from other members of his public health advisory committee. And his remarks on back-to-back nights expressing concern about a July gathering added force to the movement to push it into August.

On Tuesday he said during an interview with MSNBC that it was “hard to envision” the convention taking place as scheduled. The next day he was more forceful, telling the host of “The Tonight Show,” Jimmy Fallon, “I think it’s going to have to move into August.”

“That was all he needed to do,” said Leah Daughtry, who was the chief executive of the 2008 and 2016 Democratic conventions. “When the person who’s the front-runner, and who most people consider to be the person who’s going to get the nomination, expresses that strong an opinion, I think everybody has to pay attention.”

An August convention is likely to be smaller than the planned July event. One senior Democratic official said the event would probably be a “bare minimum” convention, with scores of people who had planned to come staying away either because of health concerns or because they had other plans for mid-August.

Changing the date of the convention will be a daunting logistical feat, requiring the rebooking of thousands of hotel rooms, among other difficulties.

The venue in Milwaukee, the Fiserv Forum, and a nearby convention center are both available the week of Aug. 17, but they are booked the week before with the annual convention of the insurer Northwestern Mutual.

“This is the right decision for the safety of those involved in the convention and for Milwaukee,” said Alex Lasry, a senior official with the Milwaukee Bucks who led the city’s convention bid. “An August convention will provide a much-needed economic boost for Milwaukee and Wisconsin as we come out of this unprecedented time.”

While Mr. Biden has a nearly insurmountable delegate lead over Senator Bernie Sanders, his last remaining rival for the Democratic presidential nomination, he cannot take formal control over convention planning until he clinches the nomination or Mr. Sanders drops out of the race.

Still, he and his team are in the early stages of the search for a potential running mate. The delayed convention could offer more time for the background check process. But some Democrats advised that there were good reasons to announce a vice-presidential pick before the convention.

“I probably would do sooner,” Ms. Daughtry said. She pointed to June, when a host of states are slated to hold rescheduled nominating contests, as a promising moment to announce a choice.

“Folks who want to get energized again, want to turn attention elsewhere, would be energized by a dynamic ticket,” she said. “That’s one reason to do it before these next round of states vote.”

Democratic officials, including Mr. Perez, had hoped and predicted that the party would have a nominee by late April, but with so many states postponing their primaries because of public health concerns about the coronavirus, Mr. Biden cannot clinch the nomination until June at the earliest if Mr. Sanders remains in the race.

In a brief virtual news conference on Thursday, Mr. Biden was asked whether he believed the Wisconsin primary should go forward in person next week, given news that the convention would be delayed.

“I listen to the scientists,” Mr. Biden said via video. “A convention, having tens of thousands of people in one arena, is very different than having people walk into a polling booth with accurate spacing, to — six to 10 feet apart, one at a time, going in and having the machines scrubbed down.”

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — Rarely has the schism between President Trump and his own public health advisers over the coronavirus pandemic been put on display quite so starkly. Even as he announced a new federal recommendation on Friday that Americans wear masks when out in public, he immediately disavowed it: “I am choosing not to do it.”

The striking dichotomy underscored how often Mr. Trump has been at odds with the medical experts seeking to guide his handling of the outbreak as well as some of the governors fighting it on the front lines, despite his move to extend social distancing guidelines through April 30 and his acknowledgment that the death toll could be staggering.

While the health specialists and some governors press for a more aggressive, uniform national approach to the virus, the president has resisted expanding limits on daily life and sought to shift blame to the states for being unprepared to deal with the coronavirus. While they sound the alarm and call for more federal action, Mr. Trump has deflected responsibility and left it to others to take a more aggressive stance.

Some of the president’s health advisers in recent days have argued that restrictions on social interaction and economic activity that have shut down much of the nation need to be expanded to all 50 states and that more Americans need to adopt them. Mr. Trump, by contrast, has characterized the crisis as generally limited to hot spots like New York, California and Michigan and has expressed no support for a nationwide lockdown. “I would leave it to the governors,” he said on Friday.

As hospitals cope with shortages of medical equipment, the administration on Friday also rewrote the federal government’s stated mission for its stockpile of supplies to make clear that it sees itself as playing a secondary role to the states. Where the federal government once said the stockpile “ensures that the right medicines and supplies get to those who need the most,” the revised version said the federal stockpile’s role was merely to “supplement state and local supplies.”

The tension over the scale of the federal response comes as the president defends his administration’s reaction to the pandemic that has now infected more than 270,000 people in the United States and has killed more than 7,000. New polls showed that public support for Mr. Trump’s handling of the crisis has begun to slip, a worrisome development for a president seeking re-election in the fall.

Mr. Trump’s decision to take a back seat to the states by leaving it to them to decide whether to shut down public life and insisting they take the lead in addressing shortages amounts to a remarkable deference by a president who typically makes himself the center of the action. It also contrasts with his own self-description as a wartime president leading a great battle against an invisible enemy.

It underscores both pragmatic and political imperatives for Mr. Trump, reflecting a traditional federalist approach that eschews imposing a one-size-fits-all national standard on states. But it also shows the president’s desire to blame the governors rather than accept any responsibility for shortages of ventilators, masks and other critical supplies.

The most fundamental point of conflict centers over how broadly the virtual lockdown of many states in the Midwest and on the East and West Coasts should be expanded. Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said stay-at-home orders should be extended to the entire nation.

“I don’t understand why that’s not happening,” Dr. Fauci said Thursday night on CNN. “The tension between federally mandated versus states’ rights to do what they want is something I don’t want to get into. But if you look at what is going on in this country, I don’t understand why we’re not doing that. We really should be.”

His comments came after a telling interchange between Mr. Trump and Dr. Deborah L. Birx, the White House pandemic response coordinator, at the briefing on Thursday. Dr. Birx expressed concern that too many Americans were not following the guidelines.

“I can tell by the curve and, as it is today, that not every American is following it,” she said. “And so this is really a call to action. We see Spain, we see Italy, we see France, we see Germany, when we see others beginning to bend their curves. We can bend ours, but it means everybody has to take that same responsibility as Americans.”

When she returned to the issue a few minutes later, Mr. Trump tried to recalibrate her remarks.

“But, Deborah, aren’t you referring to just a few states?” he said. “Because many of those states are dead flat.”

“Yes, there are states that are dead flat,” she agreed. “But you know, what changes the curve is a new Detroit, a new Chicago, a new New Orleans, a new Colorado. Those change the curves because it all of a sudden spikes with the number of new cases.” In other words, without taking action, “dead flat” states can suddenly become hot spots.

The interplay was a rare instance of Mr. Trump doing in real time on camera what officials have repeatedly denied that he does behind the scenes — attempting to water down the effect of what the medical experts were saying.

In a video that leaked online last week, Dr. Fauci was seen telling colleagues at the National Institutes of Health that he regularly made suggestions for the president’s prepared remarks before the daily briefings but that Mr. Trump “almost always” ignores them.

Where Dr. Fauci and the president have differed most strongly is on the therapeutic potential of chloroquines to treat people who have the coronavirus. Mr. Trump has said the drugs, which are approved by the Food and Drug Administration for off-label uses aside from their intended treatment of ailments like lupus and rheumatoid arthritis, could be a “game-changer.”

But Dr. Fauci has repeatedly sounded a note of skepticism, much to the president’s frustration. “I think we’ve got to be careful that we don’t make that majestic leap to assume that this is a knockout drug,” Dr. Fauci said Friday in an interview on “Fox & Friends.”

Mr. Trump has also tried in recent days to blame states for shortages of medical equipment. “They should have had more ventilators,” he said on Friday.

Jared Kushner, the president’s son-in-law and senior adviser, said at Thursday’s briefing that the federal stockpile was not for states to rely on. “The notion of the federal stockpile was it’s supposed to be our stockpile,” Mr. Kushner said. “It’s not supposed to be states’ stockpiles that they then use.”

A day later, on Friday, the description on the Department of Health and Human Services’ website for its Strategic National Stockpile was altered evidently to reflect that viewpoint.

Previously, the website said: “Strategic National Stockpile is the nation’s largest supply of lifesaving pharmaceuticals and medical supplies for use in a public health emergency severe enough to cause local supplies to run out.”

“When state, local, tribal and territorial responders request federal assistance to support their response efforts,” it continued, “the stockpile ensures that the right medicines and supplies get to those who need the most during an emergency.” It went on to say the stockpile “contains enough supplies to respond to multiple large-scale emergencies simultaneously.”

But after the revisions, first noticed by the journalist Laura Bassett, the website on Friday said that the role of the stockpile was to “supplement state and local supplies during public health emergencies.”

“Many states have products stockpiled as well,” it said.

“The supplies, medicines and devices for lifesaving care contained in the stockpile,” the site added, “can be used as a short-term stopgap buffer when the immediate supply of adequate amounts of these materials may not be immediately available.”

The explosive growth of the virus in many cities over the past two weeks has made clear that the United States has not been following the trajectory of places like Taiwan, Japan and Hong Kong that have kept outbreaks relatively contained so far. And the country has not begun to see the number of new cases level off yet, as Italy has.

Several scientists said it was too early to make ironclad statements about whether social distancing was having a powerful effect. In a few cities that acted early, including New York, San Francisco and Seattle, new reported cases have begun to slow, providing some optimism that control measures work.

“The growth rate in New York City is slowing. We do have evidence that measures we put in place two or three weeks ago may be having an effect,” said Jeffrey Shaman, a professor of environmental health sciences at Columbia University. Data from Seattle and San Francisco, he said, shows “they’ve slowed it in spots.”

“But whether they’re going to hold onto it is an open question,” he added.

The number of cases and deaths in New York City has continued to rise quickly in recent days. More than 30,000 new cases in the metro area were reported since Monday for a total of more than 100,000 cases overall.

The United States has seen new hot spots in New Orleans, Indianapolis, Chicago, Detroit and other cities that did not significantly reduce how much people traveled until mid- to late-March, leaving open a critical window for exponential growth.

Florida, which took longer than most of the country to issue a stay-at-home order and reduce the distances that people traveled, reported increasing cases this week in the Miami, Tampa and Jacksonville areas. Experts say the delays in keeping people at home in Florida and much of the Southeast could make those areas more vulnerable to outbreaks in coming weeks.

The low testing rate among the population can also muddle any assessment of the effect of distancing measures so far, said Lauren Ancel Meyers, a professor of biology and statistics at the University of Texas at Austin.

“In many of these other places, where social distancing measures were enacted very recently, it would be very difficult to see it in the data yet,” Dr. Meyers said. “Even if it’s effective.”

Peter Baker reported from Washington, and Maggie Haberman and James Glanz from New York. Josh Katz contributed reporting from New York.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — When Georgia’s governor picked Kelly Loeffler, a little-known Atlanta businesswoman, to fill the state’s vacant Senate seat late last year, her vast personal wealth and ability to fund her own campaign were top selling points for Republicans.

Ms. Loeffler, whose husband runs the New York Stock Exchange, pledged to put $20 million of her own fortune toward holding onto the seat in a special election this November. She bought a private plane to fly to and from Washington. And she blanketed televisions with ads highlighting her American-dream-style rise from a humble family farm to the pinnacle of high finance.

Now, amid an economic crisis brought on by the coronavirus pandemic, Ms. Loeffler’s wealth is threatening to become a major political liability. She is facing questions about whether, in actively trading millions of dollars in stocks over the past couple of months, she and her husband have profited off the crisis based on information she received through her position as a senator.

Ms. Loeffler, who adamantly denies wrongdoing, is one of several senators whose investments have come under scrutiny in recent days. The Securities and Exchange Commission and the F.B.I. are investigating the decision by Senator Richard M. Burr, Republican of North Carolina, to liquidate most of his portfolio in mid-February before the markets collapsed, a review that a person familiar with it said would most likely include multiple other lawmakers.

But Mr. Burr is retiring. The fallout for Ms. Loeffler, a political newcomer up for election in just seven months, is potentially much more damaging. She faces a formidable challenge not only from Georgia’s resurgent Democrats but also from Representative Doug Collins, a Republican and vocal defender of President Trump who has refused to drop out of the race despite pleas from party leaders.

Democrats and Mr. Collins are both working to try to transform what just months ago promised to be one of Ms. Loeffler’s strongest political assets — her financial acumen — into a fatal flaw.

“There are a lot of people angry at a person who has possibly used nonpublic information to benefit themselves personally while telling Georgians it was all going to be OK,” Mr. Collins said in an interview on Wednesday, referring to public statements Ms. Loeffler made weeks ago playing down the threat of the virus.

A former financial executive, Ms. Loeffler, 49, calls the charges preposterous, particularly for someone schooled in insider trading laws. Her investments, like her husband’s, are handled by outside financial advisers, she has said, and those advisers alerted her about the transactions in question only well after they were made.

“These accounts are managed by third-party entities,” Ryan Mahoney, a spokesman for Ms. Loeffler’s campaign, said Wednesday. “She doesn’t have any oversight, she doesn’t have any discretion. These are simply attacks during a very difficult time in America and in Georgia.”

The controversy stems from millions of dollars worth of trades made in the name of Ms. Loeffler and her husband in late January after she attended a private, senators-only briefing on the virus with top government health officials. At that time, as the disease was raging in China, few Americans realized its potential to become a pandemic.

The stocks sold, including Exxon Mobil, Ross Stores and AutoZone, later lost a significant amount of value, prompting accusations of insider dealing by critics who argued that the timing of the transactions could not be a mere coincidence. But there is no evidence that senators received any significant nonpublic information in the briefing.

New public disclosure forms filed with the Senate late Tuesday showed that stocks worth millions of dollars owned by Ms. Loeffler and her husband continued to be actively traded in February and early March, as the markets began to sharply decline. In some cases, the couple saved money they might have otherwise lost by selling, but in aggregate the trades do not appear to have made a substantial impact on their net worth, which exceeds $500 million.

Ms. Loeffler is married to Jeffrey Sprecher, the founder and chief executive of Intercontinental Exchange, or ICE, a publicly traded company whose crown jewel is the New York Stock Exchange. Ms. Loeffler was the chief executive of Bakkt, an ICE subsidiary, before accepting the Senate post. She is also the co-owner of Atlanta’s W.N.B.A. team, the Dream.

The legal risk to Ms. Loeffler is probably low, and there is not yet any evidence that she is under federal scrutiny like Mr. Burr. The Stock Act makes it illegal for members of Congress to trade on nonpublic information they encounter in their work. But no one has ever been prosecuted under the law, and if it is as Ms. Loeffler describes, her financial arrangement would insulate her from charges, experts said.

Still, questions about her investments could do lasting political harm to Ms. Loeffler at a time when many Americans are on edge and concerned about the devastating financial toll the crisis has taken on them.

“She may not have any kind of legal problems, but it does indicate she comes from a very different world than 99.99 percent of Georgians,” said Charles S. Bullock III, a political-science professor at the University of Georgia.

Mr. Bullock said the stock trades — particularly if they become an explicit target of a federal investigation — could “plant the seed of doubt in some voters’ mind: Can a person who is this wealthy represent your concerns, as, say, a family that has lost its job because of this pandemic?”

Even before the virus began ravaging the United States, Mr. Collins had been trying to use Ms. Loeffler’s wealth against her, putting together hard-edge digital ads making light of her expensive clothing and private plane to paint her as out of touch with ordinary people.

“From the public perspective, people require us, rightly or wrongly, to look after their interest, not our own,” Mr. Collins said on Wednesday.

Democrats, who see the seat as a potential pickup opportunity at a time when their party is making gains in the state, have made an aggressive push to capitalize on the sales, as well. American Bridge, a liberal super PAC, cut a digital ad tagging Ms. Loeffler as “Crooked Kelly.”

“Georgia hospitals are at their breaking point and Georgians are losing their jobs, their businesses and their retirement savings, yet apparently all Senator Loeffler could think about was her stock portfolio,” said Helen Kalla, a spokeswoman for Senate Democrats’ campaign arm.

Polling commissioned by Mr. Collins’s campaign shows a sharp uptick in those viewing Ms. Loeffler unfavorably in the days after initial reports in March about her January stock sales, though there have not been public surveys that confirm the findings.

Republicans involved in the race played down the long-term political risk to Ms. Loeffler. They pointed out that Republican voters had eagerly embraced Mr. Trump’s wealth, despite the complications it had created, and argued that as long as Ms. Loeffler continued to explain her unusual financial arrangements, they would not punish her either.

Ms. Loeffler’s allies have tried to turn the attacks on her against her rivals. Jesse Hunt, a spokesman for Senate Republicans’ campaign arm, said on Wednesday that Democrats were spreading “false attacks” based on shoddy journalism. He took aim at Mr. Collins, as well.

“What’s shocking is there’s a so-called Republican perpetuating liberal lies against another Republican during a global pandemic because his feelings are permanently hurt,” he said.

Katie Benner contributed reporting.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — Speaker Nancy Pelosi, moving aggressively to scrutinize the Trump administration’s handling of the coronavirus pandemic, said Thursday that she would seek to create a special bipartisan committee to oversee all aspects of the government’s response, including how it distributes more than $2 trillion in emergency aid.

The announcement, which drew immediate objections from President Trump and the top House Republican, came as leaders were struggling to determine how Congress could perform its most basic functions — both legislating and acting as a check on a president who has consistently stonewalled attempts at oversight — when lawmakers were scattered around the country with the Capitol shuttered.

The plan to create a select committee, which would require a House vote, reflects a particular sense of urgency among Democrats to keep a close watch on how Mr. Trump carries out the more than $2 trillion stimulus package that he signed into law last week. The measure created vast programs, including a $500 billion corporate bailout program and a $350 billion small-business loan initiative, and provided $150 million for states and cities coping with the coronavirus.

Democrats insisted on attaching strict oversight measures to the bailout money, but Mr. Trump — who was impeached last year on charges of abuse of power and obstructing congressional attempts to investigate — has suggested he has the authority to decide whether an inspector general appointed to oversee it has to share information with Congress.

“Where there is money, there is often frequently mischief,” Ms. Pelosi told reporters on Thursday during a telephonic news conference to replace her usual weekly briefing on Capitol Hill, another tradition upended by social distancing.

Ms. Pelosi said the panel would have subpoena power, meaning it could demand testimony and documents from the Trump administration. That raised the prospect of a new round of constitutional showdowns between Mr. Trump and the Democrat-led House over information about how the administration addressed the coronavirus threat, and its actions as the disease began rampaging across the country.

At the White House, Mr. Trump reacted angrily to the idea of a special committee, criticizing Democrats for “conducting these partisan investigations in the middle of a pandemic.”

“I want to remind everyone here in our nation’s capital, especially in Congress, that this is not the time for politics, endless partisan investigations — here we go again,” he said. “It’s witch hunt after witch hunt after witch hunt.”

transcript

“Have you been briefed by the C.D.C.?” “I have.” “Are there worries about a pandemic at this point?” “No, we’re not at all, and we have it totally under control. It’s one person coming in from China, and we have it under control. It’s going to be just fine. I’ve always known this is a real — this is a pandemic. I felt it was a pandemic long before it was called a pandemic. Now the Democrats are politicizing the coronavirus. We did one of the great jobs. You say, ‘How’s President Trump doing?’ They go, ‘Oh, not good, not good.’ They have no clue. They don’t have any clue. And this is their new hoax. I’ve always viewed it as very serious. There was no difference yesterday from days before. I feel the tone is similar, but some people said it wasn’t. We’re — what do you have, a very small number of people in the country right now with it? It’s like around 12. Many of them are getting better. Some are fully recovered already. So we’re in very good shape. We’re going to be pretty soon at only five people. And we could be at just one or two people over the next short period of time. So you’re talking about 2.2 million deaths — 2.2 million people from this. And so if we could hold that down, as we’re saying, to 100,000 — it’s a horrible number, maybe even less, but to 100,000, so we have between 100,000 and 200,000. We all together have done a very good job. The flu in our country kills from 25,000 people to 69,000 people a year. That was shocking to me. But that’s a little bit like the flu. It’s a little like the regular flu that we have flu shots for. And we’ll essentially have a flu shot for this in a fairly quick manner. View this the same as the flu. This is not the flu. It’s vicious. It is so contagious. Flu has never been like that, and there is — flu is contagious, but nothing like we’ve ever seen here. Anybody that wants a test can get a test. That’s what — the bottom line. Anybody right now and yesterday, anybody that needs a test gets a test. They’re there. They have the tests. And the tests are beautiful. And in some cases, they’re in California where we have too many. And then in other cases, the distribution could be a little bit better for certain areas, but we’ve done a good job on testing.”

Already on Thursday, Democrats were questioning the enactment of a $100 billion worker relief package passed last month after the Labor Department issued guidance that gave wide latitude for businesses with 50 or fewer employees to decline to offer the paid leave benefit included in the law.

Congress worked with remarkable speed and bipartisanship to pass the stimulus package, as the Senate remained in session — even as some of its members fell ill — and more than 200 House members returned to Washington to vote. But leaders of both parties concede that the road ahead will be even more challenging with much of the country on lockdown and lawmakers gone for the foreseeable future.

Representative Steny H. Hoyer, Democrat of Maryland and the majority leader, said in an interview Thursday that lawmakers are “just in the very first stages of figuring out” how they would operate in the coming days. In a mark of how rapidly the debate is shifting over how to convene Congress amid a pandemic, Mr. Hoyer said he was rethinking his opposition to allowing the House to vote remotely, something he previously dismissed as setting “a bad precedent.”

“Circumstances have made it clear,” Mr. Hoyer said, that remote voting must be considered. “9/11 raised the specter of members not being able to get back together, but it did not create the reality of that,” he added. “This has created the reality of members being unable to come together.”

But in the Senate, Roy Blunt, Republican of Missouri, ruled out the possibility. Mr. Blunt, who as the chairman of the Committee on Rules and Administration oversees the chamber’s operations, said there were lines the Senate would not, as of now, contemplate crossing.

“To make final decisions, to mark up a bill, to vote on a bill on the floor, I think you will see a traditional approach for a long time,” he said. “But I think we will be much more flexible in terms of how we gather information.”

Beyond the pandemic, lawmakers have a lot on their plates. They must pass annual spending bills to keep the government open, as well as their annual military policy bill. They must conduct routine oversight of the Trump administration’s initiatives and policies, including the stimulus programs, immigration, education and health care.

Mr. Hoyer acknowledged that there were a string of unanswered questions, including whether committees would meet by teleconference and how the public — accustomed to watching deliberations on C-SPAN — would be able to observe lawmakers conducting the nation’s business when most of the work was being done on private conference calls.

Already, some committees are making adjustments. The Senate Armed Services Committee, which is working on the bill that sets policy for the nation’s military, has developed a process it calls “paper hearings,” in which committee members will post questions to the Pentagon on the panel’s website and officials will have one week to answer them. Gone will be the spontaneous back-and-forth of hearings in person.

The Appropriations Committees, which control all government spending, are adamant that they still work to meet their own deadlines with staff members working remotely with federal agencies to sort out their funding needs. Before the outbreak, House leaders had set a goal of finishing their versions of the 12 spending bills by the end of June, but it is unclear if the body would even be able to meet to vote then if they were complete.

“We haven’t passed appropriations bills, we have the defense authorization bill and who knows what else might come up, either in the United States or around the world,” Representative Jim McGovern, Democrat of Massachusetts and the chairman of the Rules Committee, said in an interview. “I think we need to make it clear to the administration that Congress is not closed.”

Oversight of regular government functions might prove more difficult, particularly when much of lawmakers’ time will be consumed by the response to the pandemic.

Ms. Pelosi said the new committee would be led by one of her top deputies, Representative James E. Clyburn, Democrat of South Carolina and the majority whip, and would have an expert staff to search for waste, fraud and abuse. The speaker also lent her support to an independent, nonpartisan after-action investigation like the commission that investigated the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, but said that would have to come later.

But Representative Kevin McCarthy, Republican of California and the minority leader, called the special committee “redundant,” noting that the stimulus law already created a congressionally appointed oversight board. He also objected to the selection of Mr. Clyburn, who created a stir last month after it was leaked that he privately told colleagues that the government aid package offered Democrats “a tremendous opportunity to restructure things to fit our vision.”

As more federal employees work from home and other nonessential operations lag, just getting documentation — much less testimony — may become difficult for a whole range of congressional inquiries.

The release by the House Oversight and Reform Committee on Thursday of Federal Emergency Management Agency documents showing a shortage of personal protective equipment and other medical supplies suggested that, at least for now, such records continue to flow.

Other complications are already evident.

The House and Senate intelligence committees, responsible for monitoring a range of threats to the country, have no way to remotely receive full classified briefings ordinarily conducted in secure rooms inside the Capitol. While the committees’ top leaders have secure phone lines in their homes that allow for certain updates, they must trek to Capitol Hill to fully monitor threats facing the country.

“We are doing the best we can under the circumstances, but it can’t help but have an effect on our ability to do the oversight,” said Representative Adam B. Schiff, the chairman of the House intelligence committee. Mr. Schiff said that he had twice ventured into the Capitol to receive urgent classified updates, asking his staff to spread out at the far ends of his office as he spoke with intelligence officials.

Representative Zoe Lofgren, Democrat of California and the chairwoman of the Administration Committee, has been vetting applications like Webex and Zoom to see if they might allow committees to meet virtually, or at least gather testimony remotely from government witnesses. But it presents thorny technical and constitutional questions for a body that has never meaningfully convened online.

“You read a rule and it says, the committee will come to order,” Ms. Lofgren said. “Do you find there is a virtual quorum present? Could you do that? Most of the rules don’t say.”

Lawmakers have quietly made other, smaller changes to try to ease the way on certain issues. Mr. Blunt said he had authorized senators to use their annual travel allowances to charter private planes to come and go from Washington if needed.

Technology can help, but it is no substitute for in-person encounters, said Senator Jack Reed, the top Democrat on the Armed Services Committee. He said the panel’s members had serious concerns about the security situation in Afghanistan, including whether the Taliban, which now controls 40 percent of Afghan territory, would disassociate itself from Al Qaeda.

But the panel has decided to postpone taking testimony from the top American general there until he can come in person, in part for fear that the Russians or Chinese could hack into a video teleconference.

“I’m less trusting of technology than a lot of young people are,” Mr. Reed said. “It depersonalizes the most important part of legislative life, which is personal interaction.”

Emily Cochrane contributed reporting.

<|endoftext|>

Shamain Webster, who lives in the suburbs outside of Dallas, has seen the signs of a coming apocalypse for a while now, just as the Bible foretold.

Kingdom would rise against kingdom, Jesus taught his disciples in the Book of Luke. Ms. Webster sees widespread political division in this country. There will be fearful events, and great signs from heaven, he said. She sees biblical values slipping away. A government not acting in the people’s best interest. And now this — a pandemic.

But Ms. Webster, 42 and an evangelical Christian, is unafraid. She has been listening online to one of her favorite preachers, who has called the coronavirus pandemic a “divine reset.”

“These kinds of moments really get you to re-evaluate everything,” she said. As everyone goes through a period of isolation, she added, God is using it for good, “to teach us and train us on how to live life better.”

For people of many faiths, and even none at all, it can feel lately like the end of the world is near. Not only is there a plague, but hundreds of billions of locusts are swarming East Africa. Wildfires have ravaged Australia, killing an untold number of animals. A recent earthquake in Utah even shook the Salt Lake Temple to the top of its iconic spire, causing the golden trumpet to fall from the angel Moroni’s right hand.

But the story of apocalypse is an old one, one of the oldest humans tell. In ancient religious traditions beyond Christianity — including Judaism, Islam and Buddhism — it is a common narrative that arises in moments of social and political crisis, as people try to process unprecedented or shocking events.

The original word in Greek — apokalypsis — means an unveiling, a revelation.

“It’s not just about the end of the world,” said Jacqueline Hidalgo, chair of religion at Williams College. “It helps us see something that is hidden before.”

As a pandemic thrusts the United States and much of the world into a new economic and social order, those who study and practice religion see deeper truths being unveiled.

The crisis is revealing health care inequalities, class divisions and the fact that the most important workers in American society are among the least paid, said Jorge Juan Rodríguez V, a doctoral candidate in the history of religion at Union Theological Seminary.

“What is being revealed are the fault lines in the system that always existed,” he said. “We are just noticing it now because the system is stressed.”

About 44 percent of likely voters in the United States see the coronavirus pandemic and economic meltdown as either a wake-up call to faith, a sign of God’s coming judgment or both, according to a poll commissioned by the Joshua Fund, an evangelical group run by Joel C. Rosenberg, who writes about the end of the world, and conducted last week by McLaughlin & Associates, pollsters for President Trump and other Republicans.

David Jeremiah, a pastor who has been one of President Trump’s informal evangelical advisers, asked in a sermon recently if the coronavirus was biblical prophecy, and called the pandemic “the most apocalyptic thing that has ever happened to us.”

Among Christians, one of the most well-known apocalyptic narratives is the Book of Revelation in the New Testament, which tells the story of the defeat of an evil beast, a final divine judgment and the coming of a New Jerusalem.

While many biblical scholars read the book as a story about the destruction of corrupt political systems, many evangelical Christians believe it describes the rapture, Jesus’ return to save believers from a period of tribulation.

Joshua Johnson, 46, in Keller, Texas, spends time reading the story and interpreting its symbols, written nearly 2,000 years ago, in modern terms. He looks for the rise of what the story calls the “mark of the beast,” a demonic mark all people will be forced to bear.

He wonders if Jesus will return by 2028, 10 years after Mr. Trump moved the U.S. embassy in Israel to Jerusalem, which he saw as a prophetic sign. “I tell my children, I think we are that generation,” said Mr. Johnson, who attends Gateway Church, one of the country’s most prominent evangelical churches.

In the United States, where Christianity is by far the dominant religion, about 40 percent of American adults believe that Jesus is definitely or probably going to return to earth by 2050, including one in five religiously unaffiliated people, according to the Pew Research Center.

Some evangelical Christians are finding hope in a divine promise that God has saved them for eternity, a feeling of security in the midst of so much uncertainty.

“For me personally it is just a reminder that God is sovereign,” said Mark Lovvorn, 65, who attends First Baptist Dallas and is chairman of Providence Bank of Texas. “Regardless of what happens in the world, we have that confidence.”

For centuries, religious traditions have not only offered a way for human beings to understand apocalyptic moments. Over time, these hours of crisis have also shaped religion itself.

Some of the earliest apocalyptic speculation is found in Jewish scriptures, in stories like the Book of Daniel, as the Hellenistic age gave way to the Romans around the second and first centuries B.C. and Jewish communities experienced violent persecution. Some Jews speculated again about the end of time when the Roman army destroyed the Second Temple in Jerusalem in A.D. 70.

As the early Christians turned to an external savior and as the Romans continued to crush rebellions, Jewish leaders realized they needed to survive in the world as they knew it, explained David Kraemer, head librarian and professor of Talmud and rabbinics at Jewish Theological Seminary.

The rabbis developed a system where Jews could live anywhere, under any government and live meaningful lives connected to neighbors and to God.

“That was the Judaism that enabled Jews to live through persecution, plagues, medieval centuries and on through early modernity, which was in some ways the most difficult periods,” Dr. Kraemer said.

Every year the celebration of Passover, which begins next week and recounts 10 plagues from the Book of Exodus, is a reminder of God’s redemption. The Passover Seder “says we have been in difficult circumstances before and we will get beyond them,” Dr. Kraemer said.

In the Islamic tradition, the Quran tells stories of plagues and of a final earthquake that will tear the earth apart, as well as stories of finding God in the created world.

In mainstream Islamic thought there is a distinction between the end of the world and the concept of apocalypse, Amir Hussain, professor of theology at Loyola Marymount University, said. Apocalypse also includes what happens when one’s eyes are opened.

“Look at the creation, look at the oceans,” Dr. Hussain said, reflecting on a favorite passage in the Quran about God’s mercy. “How much better is it to have that realization in this lifetime?”

In Buddhism, time is cyclical, not linear, making apocalypse both an end and a beginning. “Apocalypse happens and then a new order starts, a new social order, new moral order,” said Vesna Wallace, professor of Buddhism at the University of California, Santa Barbara. “The story repeats itself.”

Apocalyptic stories in Buddhist scriptures share similar themes, often including an unjust ruler, social inequality, plagues and fruits that do not ripen, she explained, referring to texts from the fifth and 11th centuries A.D. Blades of grass become like swords — and even the sense of taste disappears (like a suspected symptom of the coronavirus infection).

In Buddhist traditions, apocalypse comes as a result of collective karma — everyone’s actions toward one another and the world — which means its outcome can change, even in the present circumstance. “Now people are kinder to each other, they are spending more time with families,” Dr. Wallace said. “It’s like a warning to change the course of actions, to bring back compassion, empathy, develop social equality.”

Modern, secular American life is filled with its own apocalyptic visions. Movies and television shows depict civilization on the brink of extinction. “The Walking Dead” explores life amid the zombie apocalypse. “The Hunger Games” presents a dystopian future after conflict and ecological disasters have destroyed much of the world.

A stark, binary structure — a clear good and evil, a clear before and after — appeals when society is fractured, said Dr. Hidalgo, the religion professor from Williams.

“Apocalypse is a flexible script,” she said. “A sense of shared external evil can really bring folks together.”

It is also a reminder that across several traditions, the memory of past crises can offer hope — that human beings have survived such moments before, and that the truths being revealed can become a call to action.

“The country’s idols are being exposed,” said Ekemini Uwan, a public theologian and co-host of the podcast “Truth’s Table.” “People are advocating that we throw our grandparents to the slaughter, sacrifice them on the altar of capitalism,” she added, referring to Republican leaders who have suggested that older Americans might be willing to sacrifice themselves to save jobs.

For too long America has been on “spiritual life support,” trusting its own invincibility, she said. 

“Is it the end of the world? Maybe it is, maybe it isn’t,” she said. “But we need to be ready. We need to learn to number our days because we really do not know when our last breath will be.”



<|endoftext|>

Angie Copas has high blood pressure and asthma, and her job as clerk for the village of Mattoon, Wis., does not provide health insurance. For weeks, voters have streamed into her office to request or cast absentee ballots, and she has no protective equipment, sanitizer or disinfectant wipes.

Next week, she’ll be facing hundreds more voters in person for Wisconsin’s presidential primary and other elections.

“I’m scared,” said Ms. Copas, 43. “On Election Day, we’re exposed to them and everyone they come across. I’m the only person in the office and I run it all.”

As Wisconsin moves ahead with its scheduled elections on Tuesday, which include both presidential primaries, a statewide Supreme Court race and local races, more than 1,850 municipal clerks and thousands more poll workers will be thrust into front-line positions in the nation’s struggle with the coronavirus.

These clerks and poll workers are overwhelmingly older. Some have health conditions that put them at greater risk. And while the state is organizing a last-minute blitz to distribute adequate protective equipment, few have received anything yet.

Running an election, suddenly, has become a choice between personal safety and maintaining democratic institutions.

As a result, poll workers have been dropping out by the thousands. As of Tuesday, roughly 7,000 had said they would not work, and 111 precincts did not have a single poll worker on the schedule, meaning that many locations could be forced to close. In response, Gov. Tony Evers, a Democrat, said on Wednesday that he would deploy National Guard troops to work at understaffed polling sites. Wisconsin law dictates that each site must have at least three election workers.

Clerks, however, have more of a duty to show up on Election Day, and many are responsible for training replacement poll workers. On Tuesday, 27 clerks signed a letter to Mr. Evers detailing their worries, including the health risks.

“Clerks, deputy clerks, election staff and volunteers have been working 24/7 these past two weeks to register voters and mail absentee ballots out to everyone who has made a request,” said the letter, written by Barbara Goeckner, a clerk from the village of Cambridge. “In doing so, all involved are putting themselves and their families at risk.”

Melissa Baldauff, a spokeswoman for the governor, said his office was aware of concerns and was trying to get protective equipment to offices across the state.

“Keeping people safe is the governor’s top priority,” Ms. Baldauff said. “He has also been very clear in his belief that our democracy has to continue.”

In plowing forward with its elections, Wisconsin remains an outlier on the primary calendar. Across the country, governors and lawmakers from both parties in more than a dozen states have postponed their primaries because of the pandemic. Many election days have been pushed back to June. The Democratic National Committee on Thursday postponed its national convention from mid-July to mid-August.

On Thursday, a federal judge declined to postpone the election but did extend the deadline for both requesting and filing absentee ballots, a move that Democrats who had sought the delay praised as one way to possibly mitigate crowds. 

Still, the gravest concerns are over in-person voting, which by its nature runs counter to the guidance from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to limit gatherings and stay at home. Indeed, Mr. Evers issued a “safer at home” order last week, instructing people to stay in their homes and shuttering nonessential businesses.

Yet despite the order, Mr. Evers and the Republican-controlled Legislature have pledged to move forward with the April 7 elections, noting that beyond the presidential primary, numerous local elections will also be held that involve transfers of power.

They have pointed to a surge in absentee ballot requests — now at 1.1 million — as an indicator that in-person turnout will be manageable. (Elections officials estimated in a court hearing on Wednesday that, in a normal election, that number would suggest that about 500,000 voters would still show up at the polls.)

On Friday, Mr. Evers eased his stance, asking the Legislature to order the election commission to mail ballots to every registered voter and extend vote-by-mail deadlines.

But Republican lawmakers dismissed his pleas as fantasy and vowed again to hold the election. Robin Vos, the speaker of the State Assembly, said he would be working at the polls on Tuesday.

The letter to Mr. Evers said that 50 clerks had responded to a message sent to a clerks-only email list asking them to share if they or family members had compromised health. The responses ran the gamut: Some people were cancer survivors or were currently undergoing chemotherapy. Others had diabetes, kidney disease or autoimmune disorders, or were taking immunosuppressants. Family members had lung disease, asthma, heart problems and a host of other issues.

Ms. Goeckner, who is in her 50s, does not have a spleen and donated a kidney eight years ago, said that while she was concerned about her health, she was more worried about her older colleagues. Her husband, who is also a clerk, oversees a 91-year-old poll worker who insists that she will show up on Election Day if voting takes place.

“We’re not listed as essential workers, but basically being considered essential workers,” Ms. Goeckner said. “We’re not complaining as clerks. I want people to understand the risk that’s being asked and the fact that I believe there are other safe alternatives to take in this stage.”

Across the state, poll workers have assessed that risk and are staying home. Karen Molitor, who described herself as “in the vulnerable category, over 65” and has served as a poll worker in Green Bay for the last 12 years, had planned on working until Tuesday, when she saw state guidelines recommending that people her age not work.

Heather DuBois Bourenane, the chief inspector for Sun Prairie, is in her late 40s and had begrudgingly planned to work rather than see her older colleagues show up on Election Day. But she is now wavering.

“Being complicit in putting public safety at risk seems a greater guilt to bear than letting democracy down,” she said. “That guilt should fall on the shoulders of our lawmakers.”

Her town is likely to consolidate eight polling locations into a single gymnasium, which could lead to larger crowds on Election Day. Similar situations are playing out across the state, in major cities as well as small towns. Milwaukee, which normally has 180 voting sites, announced on Wednesday that it would probably be able to keep only 12 or fewer open on Election Day.

The state election commission has been scrambling to get protective equipment to municipalities. Shipments of approximately 25,000 masks, along with plastic spray bottles, paper towels and alcohol-based hand sanitizer produced by Yahara Bay, a craft distillery in Madison, are scheduled to arrive at clerk’s offices across the state before Election Day. The state also sent more than one million ballpoint pens so voters can use their own pens to sign the poll book and mark a ballot.

To get supplies to clerks on time, the governor’s office said it took a state plane, stripped it of seats and began flying it around the state on Wednesday to drop off supplies.

But clerks still waiting for the shipments have been using an email list run by the Wisconsin Municipal Clerks Association to share tips and do-it-yourself solutions for making polling locations safer. Some locations have procured sheets of plexiglass: propped up vertically between two card tables, they can serve as a sneeze and cough guard for workers.

Shellie Benish, a clerk from the village of Black Earth, has proposed using plastic wrap to wrap some voting booths, laying it down on a surface where people fill out ballots and then discarding it afterward. And for early voting, she has been utilizing her office’s glass door.

“If someone does come in, we do not let them in,” she said. “We talk to them through the door. We have a table outside with the ballots. They fill it out, and then they slide it in underneath the door so that there’s no contact. We’re keeping that distancing, keeping our staff safe. We only have two in my front office, and they’re well over 60.”

Cathy Hasslinger, a clerk from Dunn, said she had been training her staff to follow state guidelines for a kind of safe-distance “dance” of checking identification and signing poll books. With taped markings on the floor, voters take two steps to the table, place their ID down, and take two steps back. Then a poll worker, standing two steps away on the other side of the table, approaches and picks up the ID for verification. This two-step continues for the whole voting process.

“We will be limiting contact, using hand sanitizer and doing our best, but there will be mistakes,” Ms. Hasslinger said. “The voters will follow instructions 90 percent of the time, but it will not have perfect compliance.”

Many clerks aren’t putting their hope in state officials who they believe are pushing forward with a dangerous election.

“We’re not opposed to holding the election,” said Diane Coenen, the president of the Wisconsin Municipal Clerks Association and a clerk in Oconomowoc. “But there was a better and safer way to do it, and we’ve asked for some of those measures to be put in place and we look to our leaders for that — but that has not happened.”

She lamented that state officials had not moved to conduct most voting by mail, and that deadlines had not been extended.

“We have a lot of clerks out there now with compromised health, yet they have to be with the public,” Ms. Coenen said. “Either their health is compromised or they have loved ones at home that are compromised, and the association would be devastated if we lost one of our clerks to the coronavirus.”

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — As Congress and the White House contemplate the next phase of the government response to the coronavirus pandemic and its economic toll, Democrats and President Trump are increasingly raising the prospect of enacting a multitrillion-dollar infrastructure plan that could create thousands of jobs.

Mr. Trump and congressional Democrats have clashed for years over how to structure such a plan, and striking a deal to do so would be an exceedingly steep challenge in an election year, particularly given Republican leaders’ resistance to their calls for another round of government relief. But as the novel coronavirus ravages the economy, both parties appear to be coalescing behind the idea of something akin to a New Deal-style jobs program to help the nation cope with what is expected to be a deep recession.

Whether or not a compromise can be reached, the infrastructure issue is likely to become a centerpiece of both Mr. Trump’s re-election campaign, and the Democratic fight to retain control of the House and win the Senate, as the two parties compete to position themselves as more responsive to voters’ needs.

Speaker Nancy Pelosi of California and her top lieutenants on Wednesday outlined the contours of their proposal, building off a five-year, $760 billion framework House Democrats introduced earlier this year. Among the new provisions are an extra $10 billion for community health centers fighting the spread of the pandemic and a program that would provide federal grants to pay for drinking water and wastewater utility bills in low-income households during public health crises.

“We have never, ever gone down a path that involves this much investment for the future, involving this many people in our country, and again now at this time, we’re having a further health urgency, an immediate urgency,” Ms. Pelosi said during a telephone call with reporters Wednesday morning. “We’ve had overtures from the administration on how we would go forward, and we’ll be working to get that done.”

Mr. Trump early Tuesday morning endorsed the prospect of including an infrastructure program as part of the next phase of the federal coronavirus response. Given the current low interest rates, he wrote on Twitter, such a plan “should be VERY BIG & BOLD, Two Trillion Dollars, and be focused solely on jobs and rebuilding the once great infrastructure of our Country!”

Republican leaders have grown increasingly concerned that Democrats will attempt to use the pandemic to force through their pet policy prescriptions, and have begun pulling back from the idea of another coronavirus relief package, saying lawmakers should wait to see if more relief is necessary.

“Before we go at this again — remember this is $2 trillion we added to the debt,” Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, said on Fox News Radio Tuesday. “We need to make certain that any further actions we take are directly related to this public health crisis.”

Mr. McConnell warned that Democrats were pushing “a whole laundry list of completely unrelated items” for inclusion in coronavirus response legislation. And on Wednesday, Representative Kevin McCarthy, Republican of California and the minority leader, expressed similar concerns.

“Offsetting the carbon footprint of airplanes, remaking our energy grid or changing election laws, as Democrats have suggested, have nothing to do with our war against the disease,” Mr. McCarthy said in a statement. “This isn’t a time to attempt to reshape American life through the eyes of one political party.”

Still, the president has been pressing for an infrastructure plan since before he took office. Mr. Trump campaigned in 2016 on a promise to launch a $1 trillion infrastructure initiative, and Democrats and Republicans have long called for such an effort. But the president has battled with Democrats over how to pay for such a plan, and attempts to transform the bipartisan aspirations into action have fallen short so many times that the phrase “Infrastructure Week” has become something of a joke in Washington.

“One of the challenges that you have when you deal with people in the administration who don’t have a lot of governing experience, it’s hard to depict for them how easy infrastructure was when we were able to do it,” said Representative Richard E. Neal, Democrat of Massachusetts and chairman of the House Ways and Means committee. “It used to be we routinely get 400 votes in the House, and so without that institutional memory, I think that’s a bit of a challenge.”

But the coronavirus crisis has created a new willingness among Republicans to embrace the kind of costly and far-reaching government programs they typically resist.

In March, Congress approved and Mr. Trump signed three packages totaling more than $2 trillion to respond to the pandemic, including a substantial boost to the federal social safety net.

“The president very much wants to rebuild the country, and with interest rates low, that’s something that’s very important to him,” said Steven Mnuchin, the Treasury secretary, on CNBC Wednesday. “We expect there will be more bills, and we think it is a great time now to invest in infrastructure.”



Democrats’ infrastructure plan includes billions of dollars to expand the country’s passenger rail network, improve Amtrak stations and services, maintain ports and harbors, increase climate resiliency and further address greenhouse gas pollution. It would also dedicate funds to expand broadband access, a response in part to the extent that millions of Americans have depended on internet connectivity while staying at home to slow the spread of the virus.

Senate Republicans support an infrastructure plan put forward by Senator John Barrasso, Republican of Wyoming and chairman of the Environment and Public Works Committee, along with Senators Thomas R. Carper of Delaware, the top Democrat on the committee, Shelley Moore Capito, Republican of West Virginia, and Benjamin L. Cardin, Democrat of Maryland. The legislation advanced through the committee unanimously in July.

Mr. Trump mentioned the measure, which would authorize $287 billion over five years and includes $259 billion to maintain and repair roads and bridges, in his State of the Union address in February. And before posting his call for infrastructure investment on Twitter, he spoke with Mr. Barrasso about incorporating that measure into the future legislative response to the pandemic.

“As we look to the things we can do to help the economy after the medical crisis is behind us, clearly funding roads and bridges and highways should be a part of that,” Mr. Barrasso said in an interview on Wednesday. “It’s a way to get people back to work and get money directly to the states where it can be used and deployed to projects that are already on the books and ready for funding.”

Mr. Mnuchin and Mr. Neal were in frequent communication about the possibilities of an infrastructure package well before the pandemic reached the United States. In the fall, the Treasury secretary privately told the Ways and Means Committee chairman that an infrastructure bill would be next in line after the House passed the administration’s revised North American trade agreement, which it did in December, according to a person familiar with the conversation who was not authorized to discuss it publicly.

Ms. Pelosi said it was crucial that the package include Democrats’ proposals for expanding broadband access across the country.

“This is so essential because of the historic nature of the health and economic emergencies that we are confronting,” Ms. Pelosi said on Wednesday. “We must take bold action to renew America’s infrastructure.”

Other top Democrats also pointed to the establishment of the Works Progress Administration and the Civilian Conservation Corps, two New Deal programs that helped employ millions of Americans after the Great Depression, as precedent for using infrastructure investment to revive the economy and reduce unemployment.

“There is no one on either side of the aisle who doesn’t believe our infrastructure needs to be reconstructed,” said Representative Peter A. DeFazio, Democrat of Oregon and the chairman of the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee. “We’re going to need to retool America, rebuild our infrastructure and I think it is absolutely a key part of this whole package. We’re looking forward.”

Sheryl Gay Stolberg contributed reporting.

<|endoftext|>

Hi. Welcome to On Politics, your guide to the day in national politics. I’m Lisa Lerer, your host.

Sign up here to get On Politics in your inbox every weekday.

I’m not going to sugarcoat it: The news is grim.

Last night, government scientists predicted that 100,000 to 240,000 Americans could die as a result of the coronavirus — and that’s the best-case projection. New reporting today says that the economic recession from the virus could last into next year, or even longer.

In the middle of all that worry, we have to keep muddling through our suddenly isolated lives. Get dressed (#leggingsforever), cook some food, home-school the kids, clean our houses and, if possible, try to make a living or maybe ask for help for the first time.

That juggle isn’t easy for anyone, even for members of Congress.

Representative Katie Porter, a freshman Democrat from California, has become one of the most visible lawmakers during the coronavirus crisis. Her dogged questioning of Robert Redfield, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, secured a pledge of free coronavirus testing for all Americans.

Ms. Porter is also the only single mother in Congress, a position that leaves her in charge of distance learning at home for three school-age children while helping with the national response at work. Last week, she was self-quarantining after experiencing symptoms associated with the virus.

We talked to her about her daily routine of hours of conference calls, peanut butter and jelly sandwiches and members of Congress who can’t figure out how to unmute their phones. (As always, our conversation has been edited and condensed.)

Hey, Congresswoman, how are you? You recently had a coronavirus scare, right?

I did. I tested negative, which was a big relief. Most importantly, I’m feeling better.

One of the things that the doctor said to me, which I thought was interesting — he said: “Well, I want you to be aware that there are false negatives. Because you had a fever, we want you to treat this the same as we would if it was positive.”

I wanted to ask what precautions you were taking to avoid the virus, but I guess maybe those didn’t work so well?

Congress members from far away — people like me, who take two plane rides, three airports, and I’m in two Ubers — I mean, that’s a lot of contact in the day, plus the time zones and the exhaustion. The vote that we took two weeks ago was in the middle of the night, like, 1 in the morning. So it’s important to try to take care of yourself in the same way that we’re asking everyone to do right now, while you’re trying to do your job.

You’re a single mom with three kids. What does self-quarantining look like in your house?

For the first couple of days, it looked like a lot of peanut butter and jelly sandwiches and my kids shouting at me through the door. Once my boyfriend got here, I just kept the bedroom door closed. And he would come in, bring a tray of food, and leave.

But it’s hard. That’s the perspective of single moms and single dads and what self-quarantine is going to mean for them. It is something I haven’t heard a lot of talk about. I got sick on Thursday night. I had a little bit of a cold before that, but by Thursday night I felt really terrible. And I called the doctor on the nurse’s line on Friday morning and they told me to isolate in my room. Don’t leave your room, have someone bring you food. And I said, “Well, I can’t do that. I’m a single mom. There’s no one to get the food. There’s no one.” And the nurse was great. She’s like, “OK, then what we’re going to do is we’re going to pretend your children all have symptoms too,” and so the whole household is self-quarantined.

You have a big job. You also have the kids. Walk me through what your day looks like now.

The school district has done a great job, but it was overwhelming. I have three kids in three different grades. At one point, I wrote to my kid’s school principal, and I said, “So sorry to bother you, but could you ask that the teachers put what grade level they’re talking about in these emails?” I don’t even know which student they’re talking about.

Because I’m in California time, the second I wake up, I am already three hours behind in many ways, in catching up with what’s happening in D.C. I spend most of my day on the phone, especially these last few days. I’m averaging between five and seven hours of conference calls a day.

Wow. Really?

Yeah, for example, yesterday, I talked to a company that has a drug in the trial pipeline that might be useful for Covid, and so we wanted to send that along to the right government authorities for them to review. I had a call with religious leaders, talking with them both about their work in getting their members to participate in the census, but also about what this pandemic and shelter-in-place order is meaning for our faith communities, particularly with things like Passover and Ramadan coming up. Press interviews to try to explain things to people. I just had a call with some labor leaders this morning, talking with them about what’s going on with their members. Some of those workers — and I’m talking a lot about doctors and nurses and their protective equipment, which is incredibly important — but grocery store workers, pharmacy workers, they need personal protective equipment too.

How are you keeping in touch with what’s happening in Congress?

I’ve had a lot of conversations with my Democratic colleagues. Most of the colleagues I work with are freshmen — that mostly goes on via text. But with the whole group, these large group conference calls, there will be anywhere between 50 to 200 members on the line.

I listened to six and a half hours of these calls on Wednesday. The most common thing I learned is that people need to unmute their phone if they want to speak.

So the most common repeated message from leadership wasn’t, “We’re all going to be OK,” it was, “You might have to unmute your phone.” So there’s a real need for Congress to improve our technological capacity, improve our procedures. Two weeks ago I read a letter — I personally whipped over 50 members to support remote voting.

I’m worried about all of my colleagues who traveled [to vote for the economic bill last week]. I’m grateful that they were willing to do that and that they’re well enough that they were able to do that. But we’re asking businesses and schools to come up with remote learning plans and new technology, facilitate remote work and allow people to stay home if they’re sick. And Congress is creating exceptions for themselves. The mark of a good leader is to lead by example. 

Obviously, you were not there last week to vote on the economic legislation. Would you have voted for this package?

Yes, I would have.

There’s important things in the package that just can’t wait. The unemployment insurance, the extension of unemployment benefits, the increase of unemployment benefits, the $100 billion to hospitals and providers, the FEMA disaster relief funds, the additional funds to local governments, the stimulus checks — I wish they were bigger but there’s a lot here that urgently needs to happen.

But there are parts of this bill that are a concern to me and then there’s a lot of stuff that’s missing.

Like what?

How we’re going to do oversight of what’s happening is going to be really important during this pandemic. So it’s not enough to just pass the law; you have to make sure that the law is helping people in real life. And I’m really concerned about the $500 billion Treasury fund.

The Treasury works fast. The oversight panel doesn’t have to issue its first report until 30 days after the Treasury secretary takes action.

What the Treasury secretary is doing should be breaking news, not the History Channel. So we’ve got to have that panel set up immediately and we’ve got to put people on that panel who know how to do oversight work, who understand financial markets, who understand corporate governance and investor laws, who understand corporate debt, who are pro-worker.

Another one of the things that House Democrats wanted in the bill was to direct OSHA [the Occupational Safety and Health Administration] to issue an emergency regulation within seven days describing what personal protective equipment or what workplace protections front-line essential workers need. That did not get put in the bill. If we were having hearings, we could be hauling in the head of OSHA right now and asking why they aren’t doing this. It doesn’t take an act of Congress to issue that regulation; OSHA can do it. But not if we don’t hold their feet to the fire.

Legislation isn’t the only tool in the tool kit. Rank and file members get things done by using their voices in hearings, by meeting with their communities and constituents and distributing resources or help. And so that stuff needs to get going.

Can I ask you one more personal question? How have you explained this crisis to your own kids?

This is sort of both humorous and sad. When I got home on Saturday, the 14th, I felt so relieved. And I said to my kids, “I’m here. I’m going to stay here. It’ll be OK,” and I said, “Do you have any questions?” And my 8-year-old said, “Coronavirus is going to be kind of like an ‘Avengers’ ending where Thanos snaps his fingers and half of all people disappear.”

And that was her understanding of this.

I’ve been doing a lot of supervision of hand washing, obviously. With my own kids, they’ve been terrific. The fact that their mom is often distant from them means that they understand the concept that just because you can’t see somebody doesn’t mean that they’re not there and they don’t love you. They’ve had to do a lot of FaceTiming with me over my time in Congress. And so we have some of these remote procedures already in place in our own life to stay in touch. And they’re helpful during this crisis.

Join the DealBook team tomorrow at 11 a.m. Eastern time with special guest Maggie Haberman, a New York Times White House correspondent, to go inside the Trump administration’s response to the coronavirus crisis and what steps might come next. Register for the call now.

We’re sharing some of your dispatches from around the globe about life in the time of coronavirus.

Today, we have Chanel Bishton from Vallejo, Calif., with an ode to the bidet.

Visitors mocked meMy teenage son scoffed —When I installeda European style bidet —In our bathroom.Now I am the EnvyOf apparently the worldIt seemsNo toilet paper in sightBut clean rumps here —No less —Warm water sprayedBlow-driedWith a fresh towel to finishIf still dampFor this I am very grateful.

Have you come up with a clever way to manage social distancing? How’s that distance learning going? We want to hear it. Email us at onpolitics@nytimes.com. (Don’t forget to include your name and where you live.)

Who can resist a BSB reunion?

Thanks for reading. On Politics is your guide to the political news cycle, delivering clarity from the chaos.

On Politics is also available as a newsletter. Sign up here to get it delivered to your inbox.

Is there anything you think we’re missing? Anything you want to see more of? We’d love to hear from you. Email us at onpolitics@nytimes.com.

<|endoftext|>

The political science class was called “Forced Migration and Refugees.” Students read accounts of migrants fleeing broken economies and seeking better futures, of life plans drastically altered and the political forces that made it all seem necessary.

Then suddenly, the subject matter became personal: Haverford College shut down and evicted most students from the dormitories as the coronavirus spread through Pennsylvania.

Like many college courses around the country, the class soldiered on. The syllabus was revised. The students reconvened on a videoconferencing app.

But as each logged in, not everyone’s new reality looked the same.

One student sat at a vacation home on the coast of Maine. Another struggled to keep her mother’s Puerto Rican food truck running while meat vanished from Florida grocery shelves. As one young woman’s father, a private equity executive, urged the family to decamp to a country where infections were falling, another student’s mother in Russia couldn’t afford the plane ticket to bring her daughter home.

“Now Russia is about to close its borders,” Sophie Chochaeva told her classmates, in the days before the country did. She was one of 135 students still on campus, in a dorm room she called “the cozy foxhole,” as the world outside became a ghost town. “This crisis is exposing that a lot of people don’t have anywhere to go.”

The outbreak of the coronavirus — and the accompanying economic devastation that has left 10 million people almost instantly unemployed — has put America’s class divide on full display. Gig employees were the first to suffer, with many of their jobs vanishing without unemployment benefits. Office employees retreated to work-from-home arrangements while janitors cleaned the buildings they fled and delivery workers brought packages to their doorsteps.

But college was meant to be different. For decades, small liberal arts schools like Haverford, a short ride from Philadelphia, prided themselves on being the “great equalizer,” offering pedigrees not just to the scions of East Coast elites but also to the children of first-generation immigrants. Scholarships filled in for family money. Students ate the same cafeteria food in the morning and bunked in the same creaky beds at night.

No longer — at least not while the virus spreads through the country.

“It’s as though you had a front-row view on American inequality and the ways in which it was disguised and papered over,” said Anita Isaacs, the course’s professor who has taught political science at Haverford since 1988. The first gulf war, the Sept. 11 attacks, the Great Recession — she had seen them all through the eyes of her students.

“There’s been nothing like this before,” she said.

transcript

From The New York Times, I’m Michael Barbaro. This is “The Daily.”



Today: Colleges across the U.S. have long prided themselves on bridging the differences between their students. Nick Casey on how the coronavirus has instead reenforced them.

It’s Tuesday, May 5.

Nick, where did this story start for you?

Well, the virus was starting to spread across the U.S., and I started to make lots of calls to people to see what was going on — friends, family members, some old sources of mine. And one of the people that I chatted with was a professor at Haverford College named Anita Isaacs.

Anita, hi. How are you doing?

Hi, Nick. I’m OK. How are you?

And she started telling me about how strange it was to be a professor right now.

Where are you right now? I’ve been asking this to everybody.

I’m locked down in Bethesda, Maryland, miles and miles away from my place of work, from my books, and from my students.

So Anita is an old source of mine. I’ve known her for more than 10 years. We met each other when I worked as a foreign correspondent in Mexico with The Wall Street Journal.

If I remember right, you were a young reporter that was very curious about Guatemala.

She’s a political scientist. She covers Central America. She covers Mexico. And all of our conversations always had to do with those two things. But when she would talk, she’d tell me a little bit about what it was like working at Haverford. It’s a liberal arts college just outside of Philadelphia — 1,200 students, very elite college. The tuition’s about $76,000 when you add up room and board. And about half the students there receive financial aid to some degree. And I could always see that, like, part of her work was about these kids that she was teaching and just the environment of Haverford itself. It was a Quaker institution, was really into equality, social justice. And most importantly, one of its missions, and Anita’s mission, was about creating a level playing field for undergraduates that came from all walks of life, whether they were wealthy kids or whether they were poor kids.

They all have to eat the crummy food at the Haverford dining center. They all live in the same dorms. They all have the same internet. They’re all in the same classrooms. So we have this physical and intellectual environment in which there is a fair amount of equalization.

No matter how unequal America might be, no matter how unequal the world was, there was this one point in a student’s life where they could actually get an experience that felt like equality.

It’s imperfect. It’s very imperfect, but there is a kind of leveling of a playing field.

Right. Outside the walls of a college, there are all sorts of differences. But in the classrooms, on the quads, there’s this idealized notion, if it can be accomplished, that people are kind of equal.

Yeah, she calls it the great equalizer. That’s a phrase that you hear a lot of people involved with college education talking about. And Haverford was the ultimate bubble for that.

So how is this playing out in her classrooms?

Well, Anita is teaching this one class right now, and it’s called Forced Migration and Refugees. So they’re studying people that got kicked out of Latin America and tried to start new lives in other parts of the world, especially the U.S.

It’s a course in which ethnicity intersects with class. And so we are patently aware, just by virtue of the way the students engage with the material, of the class differences as well as our ethnic diversity.

And her class itself is composed of a wide array of students with different backgrounds. Some are wealthy, some are not.

These classes are difficult because we deal with very difficult material that is politically polarizing, and that is very personal, always, for a certain number of students in my class.

So when Anita is thinking about a lot of this, she’s kind of seeing this little laboratory for everything that she likes in this classroom itself. And the class had been going great.

We had just had by far the best class of the semester. We were literally covering a board with our ideas, our arms sort of interwoven with each other’s arms in an incredible display of community.

In a lot of ways, everything that Anita was preaching and thinking about as what draws her into teaching to begin with was really materializing and becoming apparent in this class that she was teaching on the Haverford campus.

It was so exciting. And then over spring break, everything fell apart.

While millions of college students have been sent home during this pandemic and now have to take classes online, earlier this morning —

The University of Washington —

Stanford University is cancelling classes.

The University of South Carolina made a major decision to cancel class next week.

The coronavirus pandemic has disrupted the lives of some 20 million college students as campuses —

Everybody ended up being dispersed. And this community — this small community of our classroom — and the bigger community, or bubble, of Haverford was burst.

It was devastating because the bubble that we can be lulled into believing that Haverford provides, and those bonds that we had forged, were ripped apart in some ways, or at least really loosened.

So what actually happens to Anita’s class?

Well, everybody goes home, and they try to reassemble the class on Zoom.

Hi, everyone.

And Anita was telling me about how it’s awkward to have everybody trying to talk.

OK, why don’t you all unmute this today so that we’re actually talking to each other, rather than living in this world where all I see are red microphones off. OK, so —

But eventually, Anita got the rhythm of it, and class started to work. And then one night —

One student sent me a message.

— Anita got an email from one of her students in the class who was late sending in a chapter from her thesis.

And she described the intense panic that was preventing her from being able to write a single sentence.

And Anita said the email just floored her, everything that was going on in the student’s life right then. So I decided that I’d give that student a call.

So, Tatiana, tell me where you’re speaking to me from.

I’m at home right now, sitting on my kitchen counter.

And who is this student?

So her name is Tatiana Lathion. She was born in Indiana but largely grew up in Jacksonville, Florida, where her parents own a Puerto Rican food truck. Tatiana says that her life plan probably wasn’t going to include college. She hadn’t really been thinking about it.

College is obviously super expensive. And my brother, he only did a semester of community college before he dropped out. So for me, it wasn’t really that of a high priority, I guess you could say. But then my guidance counselor got a hold of my grades and —

But, she had a guidance counselor that looked at her grades and said that she probably was going to qualify for a free ride at a really good school.

And she called me into the office one day, and she was like, you need to apply to all these scholarships, and one of them was QuestBridge. So that’s how I got involved —

So she applied to college through a program called QuestBridge, which matches up underprivileged students with colleges that are looking to offer full-tuition scholarships. And to her surprise, she got one. And she was off to Haverford.

What did you know about Haverford before they told you that you were going to go there with a full scholarship?

So basically little to nothing. I kind of googled the school right after, [LAUGHS], figured out where that one was. And, yeah.

And how did you feel when you found that out?

It was a pretty weird feeling. It was like right after lacrosse practice had ended. We were driving home, and I just happened to check my email on the ride home. And I was like, oh, mom, guess what? I’m going to Philadelphia for the next four years. [LAUGHS] So that was cool, I guess.

And what was the experience like for her at Haverford, given that she really never expected to be there?

Well, you know, Tatiana is one of the first to say that she came from a very different background than many of her classmates. But I think she really took like a duck to water when she got to Haverford. She immediately got on the lacrosse team, and that’s where she made all of her best friends. She lived with them in the same floor of a dormitory, and she built her life around the game and also around academics there. And during those four years that she was at Haverford, things had gone very well, had really lived up to many of the ideals that Anita talks about. And Tatiana was at the end of her time. She was a senior. She was about to go out into the world. And then suddenly, the pandemic came and threw everything into jeopardy.



We’ll be right back.

So, Nick, the pandemic hits over spring break. Tatiana is sent home, along with all the other students at Haverford. What has it been like for her, suddenly finishing her senior year of college at home?

Well, it’s been really tough. Her parents’ food truck business is way down. A huge part of the business is selling lunch to office workers.

But now all the lunch spots have canceled because people aren’t in the offices anymore.

But the expenses of the food truck are still piling up.

If the business does have to close, I know my parents are considering just getting — them taking out loans, and obviously that’s a big step. But of course, we’ve been through so much already, I’m sure [LAUGHS]. This isn’t our first crazy trip down Disaster Lane, so.

Would they potentially have to depend on you for assistance?

Possibly. They’re really trying not to right now, but it could possibly come down to that. We’ll see what happens.

So there’s that, and then there’s trying to go to school in the middle of all of this.

How’s it been just trying to concentrate in a house that’s not a classroom anymore, and you’ve got to go to class there?

Yeah, it’s super interesting. Like right now, my parents are both in the same room as me right now.

Yeah, I can hear them. It sounds like they’re making food or something.

Yeah, they’re bustling about.

She’s trying to find places in her house that she can still be in college.

So I unfortunately do not have a desk in my bedroom. So I have been using the porch, or the dining room table is covered with my school stuff right now. I know at Haverford I had my spaces. I never could really do work in my room, so I would always go either to the library or to 30 basement and just grind it out for an all-nighter. I obviously don’t really do all-nighters anymore, because that’s disruptive to the rest of the family. And then trying to find the moments of the day where it’s quite enough to sit down and read and try to type a bunch of pages has been challenging, but we are trying our best.

And is she able to do her coursework for Anita’s class?

She’s trying to keep up, but the truth is she can’t. So basically, she just gets to the point where she sits down at her computer and writes this email, asking for a few more days.

I was wondering, do you have that email that you wrote to Anita still?

Yeah, I think so.

Do you think that you could just read the email out in your own voice?

Sure, I’ll try not to cry. [LAUGHS] Oh, I see. I don’t think I can read this without bawling.

I wrote it while I was crying, and it’s just [EXHALES] bringing it back. So it says: “Hey, Anita, I think I’m really stressed out about thesis and stuff. It’s a little stressful at my house at the moment. And with everything shutting down, there’s no real place for me to go to get away from everything so I can focus.

“That being said, I am so, so sorry. This chapter is so late, but I don’t think I’ll be able to finish it tonight. I feel terrible, [SNIFFLING] but I was not able to get it done today. (CRYING) But it seems like every time I sit down to work, I have this panic moment that it’s all literally for nothing now, and the problems that are occurring at home just feel so more relevant.

“My parents own a food truck, and that’s their main source of income. And with the city closing down restaurants now, I’m not sure their savings will allow them to both survive this quarantine and still keep the business. And with me being home, I know that that is just extra expenses that they need to cover. And since I’m not working right now, I can’t help them. So I’m contemplating living with my brother possibly or getting a part-time job. I know these shouldn’t be excuses for not completing my work, but I am finding myself just a little more overwhelmed with each passing day, as everything has started to sink in.

“This is not the email I wanted to send to you today, and I’m very disappointed in myself for putting myself in this situation. I’m so sorry, again, and I want you to know that I’m still working on it. Best, Tatiana.” [SNIFFLES] Yeah.



[SIGHS] What’s just heartbreaking about that is in the middle of everything that you were going through, that you would even worry that you were having to give him excuse.

Yeah. (CRYING) It feels really bad because usually I’m so on top of my work, and it feels like I can’t focus the way I have in the past. I’ve never been one to turn in late work, so it feels daunting to finish the last 40 pages that I still have to write.

Yeah, you’re at the finishing line.

Yeah.

You are. You are.

I basically just sat in front of my computer reading this message and actually crying, because I didn’t know how I could help this student. I felt paralyzed and overcome with grief. And I was devastated in the same ways that occasionally I’ve been devastated in the field, talking to separated migrant families or deportees. It felt the same.

So how does Anita respond after she gets this letter?

I said, please, can we talk? I just want to talk. And we did.

Anita gave her a call immediately.

What I wanted to convey to her was that it isn’t worthless. That she has achieved so much, that she has grown so much as a student over the years since I saw her in an intro class to working on her thesis. That she has so many skills, so much capacity. That I will be able to write such brilliant letters for her. That it’s not worthless, that this will pass, and that everything that she has done will have been worthwhile. And that, [EXPLETIVE], I’m going to make sure it is.

Anita is wanting to let Tatiana know that she’s there for her, whether it’s giving her an extension or just being there for her as a human being. And I think Anita, she’s seeing Tatiana and many of her students, in ways that she hadn’t before.

I was now exposed to the real world. It was like a real live series of episodes that I was witnessing firsthand as a teacher, as I began to interact individually with my students who found themselves in all kinds of different and very, very painful situations.

Nick, I’m curious what you make of the situation. It feels like the world that Anita wanted to create at Haverford was always a little bit of a fantasy, right? I mean, she called it a bubble, and that’s because in some ways it is a bubble. It wasn’t reality. Is this story about what happens when the reality strikes?

Yeah, I think their stories make you wonder whether the whole idea that college was a great equalizer was kind of a fiction, because all it took was a virus to show that life was actually extremely unequal for these students. Yeah, they slept in the same dorms, and they went to the same cafeterias when they were in college. But when they had to go home, all of their homes were vastly different. All of these divisions between school life and family life all just started to break down. And some families had the ability to shield their kids from this, and others just didn’t. But you’ve got to remember, on the other hand, there is some strange silver lining to this, which is that what’s happened has actually shown what’s real, and the realities in people’s lives. And I think for everybody involved, whether it’s Anita or Tatiana or any of the other students in that class, it’s created an empathy that you didn’t necessarily have when those differences were papered over. And you have people calling up and saying, is everything OK? In a way that you might not have before this actually threw reality into such sharp relief.

Right, because the other side of not being able to paper over something is that people now see each other more fully and really than maybe they did on campus.

Yeah, it’s more of a question of trying to get to something equal by acknowledging what the problems actually are and living through them.

So as best you can tell, what is next for Tatiana?

Well, her scholarship at Haverford goes to the end of the year. She’s going to graduate. She’s going to finish her thesis. And she’s going to enter the worst job market in American history that anybody remembers, and that is extremely stressful for Tatiana.

But until then, she’s working at the food truck. Florida is gradually reopening. And on Wednesdays, she logs onto Zoom. She goes to the Forced Migration and Refugee class with Anita Isaacs, and all of those differences are very much on display as each of the students struggles and deals with the virus from their homes and their different circumstances.

Thank you, Nick.

Thanks, Michael.



OK, guys, we’re done. Molly, you stay on so we can figure out what to do with this, but let’s — we’re done. Thank you so much.

Bye-bye.

Bye. Have a good weekend, everyone.



We’ll be right back.

Here’s what else you need to know today. On Monday, at least 12 countries began easing restrictions on their citizens’ movements, including Spain, Germany, Poland, India and Nigeria. Most of the countries are in Europe, including Italy, whose restrictions were among the earliest and strictest.

[SPEAKING ITALIAN]

In a speech, Italy’s prime minister urged Italians to remain cautious —

[SPEAKING ITALIAN]

— saying, quote, “If you love Italy, keep your distance.” And The Times reports that the Trump administration is privately projecting a significant increase in the number of infections and deaths in the coming weeks. The internal projections forecast about 200,000 new cases each day by June 1, up from the current figure of 25,000 cases a day. And they project a daily death toll of 3,000, nearly double the current number of about 1,750. Despite those projections, President Trump continues to encourage states to reopen their economies.

That’s it for “The Daily.” I’m Michael Barbaro. See you tomorrow. [MUSIC PLAYING]

Several nights before the class was to reconvene online in late March, Professor Isaacs received an email from one of her teaching assistants, Tatiana Lathion, a college senior whose parents own the food truck. Their source of income was on the verge of liquidation as stay-at-home orders loomed in Jacksonville, Fla., where they lived.

“I’m not sure my savings will allow them both to survive this quarantine and still keep the business,” she wrote. She said she was thinking of getting a part-time job at a grocery store.

Wasn’t college supposed to get her away from all that? 

“I have this panic moment that it’s literally for nothing now,” Ms. Lathion wrote to her professor.

Ms. Lathion had not thought she would attend college.

College and the coronavirus.

Her mother had grown up in Puerto Rico before moving to Indiana and then Florida, and while she had sought out good public schools for her children, she didn’t push for education beyond that. But Ms. Lathion had high grades and a college counselor suggested that she apply to QuestBridge, a nonprofit that matches low-income students with colleges offering full-tuition scholarships.

As some high school seniors traveled the East Coast touring potential schools, Ms. Lathion asked her guidance counselor to pick out colleges that she thought would be a good fit.

“I didn’t think I was going to get that scholarship,” she said, so it was a surprise to her when Haverford came back with a full ride. She had to learn where it was.

“I was Googling Haverford, and was like, ‘Oh, I’m going to Pennsylvania, Mom,’” she said.

If Ms. Lathion found Haverford by chance, the school’s recruitment of underprivileged students like her was more by design.

The college was founded by Quakers in the 1830s and has a history of preaching equality and social justice. While tuition hovers around $73,000 a year, families earning less than $60,000 are exempted from taking out loans. By some metrics Haverford did better than most Ivy League schools in bringing in low- and middle-income students, despite having a far smaller endowment.

Sensing the doors wide open, Ms. Lathion plunged into playing on the lacrosse team. The sport was dominated by white, upper-class players who often learned at Northeast prep schools, but the Haverford team quickly made a place on the field for Ms. Lathion, who had learned to play in Florida.

The players wore the same uniforms, and even chose to live together on an apartment floor.

But while her teammates vacationed or completed internships, Ms. Lathion spent her summers helping her parents make empanadas at their Florida food truck. In a text message chat last winter break, her teammates discussed Christmas plans with their families. Ms. Lathion revealed she was in Puerto Rico, staying with hers after a powerful earthquake.

“She would send texts to the team group chat and say ‘Fifth day without power, hope you’re enjoying break!’” said Isabel Canning, a junior who played on the team. “I would Snapchat her back and ask if everything was OK.”

Ms. Canning had Latin roots, too. Her mother emigrated from Portugal in the 1970s, then married into an established Maine family that ran a distribution business. Ms. Canning’s father ran the company before starting a consulting outfit of his own. Each summer the family headed to the seaside town of Boothbay, where Ms. Canning’s father had taught her to play lacrosse.

By late January, as the coronavirus was moving beyond China, Ms. Canning saw a message from Ms. Lathion saying she planned to be a teaching assistant that coming semester. The two teammates discovered they had both been recruited by Ms. Isaacs to assist with her seminar on forced migration from Latin America.

They were joined in class by Ms. Chochaeva, who as a child bounced between the homes of her separated parents, several subway stops from Moscow’s Red Square. She had taken English classes until her family could no longer afford them, and then taught herself. Before Haverford, she had never visited the United States.

Like Ms. Lathion, Ms. Chochaeva imagined her prospects would dramatically change by attending college. She remembered lying on the floor and staring up at the ceiling when she found out she had been accepted to Haverford.

“I felt like some kind of uncertainty ended, and a new kind of uncertainty began,” she said.

Chace Pulley was one of the first in the class to realize the virus was having a big impact. Her father, an investor, had a trip planned to Japan, where he did business. Schools were closing. As Asian markets began to crash, Ms. Pulley’s parents assured her they had plenty of cash on hand, a decision they made after the Great Recession.

Updated Dec. 18, 2020

The latest on how the pandemic is reshaping education.

Ms. Chochaeva had flashes of 2008, too. She was 9 when her mother lost her job in Russia and was forced into a pension; Ms. Chochaeva’s older brother, who suffered from a learning disability, developed diabetes, which required costly treatment. She remembered how food had disappeared from shelves, and called her mother to make sure she was fine.

On March 4, Ms. Isaacs had her students stand at a chalkboard to create an enormous diagram of all the concepts they had studied in class. Students packed in and stretched over one another to draw connections like “fear and insecurity” and “familial connections.” It would be the last time the class would gather like that.

During spring break in mid-March, Ms. Lathion and Ms. Canning were headed to a lacrosse game in Virginia that was suddenly canceled out of safety concerns. They had already been told Haverford was delaying the start of classes because of the virus; now came a message to students not to return that semester at all.

Ms. Canning’s family quickly brought her to their summer home after she car-pooled to Maine with another student, leaving a family Land Rover on campus. Ms. Canning is on immunosuppressant drugs for a condition she developed on an educational trip to Kenya. An uncle who worked at the family distribution business gave her masks and gloves.

Ms. Lathion returned home to find Latin Soul Grille, her family’s food truck and their only livelihood, was starting to fail. It was up to her to help keep it going. As the lacrosse players gathered up for a video conference Ms. Lathion arrived late; she’d spent the day on what she called a “scavenger hunt” to find what remaining meat was still available for the truck at grocery stores.

By then, Ms. Pulley had made it to her family’s home in Hillsborough, Calif., a wealthy community with sweeping views of the San Francisco Bay. Her father had wanted the family to come with him to Japan, where he had traveled for business in the past and where infections seemed to be subsiding, but they ultimately decided to stay in California.

Andreanna Papatheodorou, another student in the seminar, tried to move back in with her mother, who had once been an undocumented immigrant from Argentina. But the pandemic made her mother anxious, and it became too much for Ms. Papatheodorou, who decided to return to Haverford.

“I said one less person in and out is better for you guys,” she said, before returning to Pennsylvania. “If I get sick, you can’t take care of me.”

When the class meets on Wednesdays at 1:30 on the Zoom app, the students discuss the virus and the ways it will affect the migrants they were learning about before the outbreak. But the conversation increasingly works its way to their own fate.

“Both my parents are priests,” began Hannah Stanley, who had retreated to Baltimore. “They had to close the church. Now they’re wondering, after months of quarantine how long it will take for people to come back.”

Sofia Bomse, in New Mexico, was disheartened.

“I would like to think there will be a call for radical social change now, but I don’t think that’s going to happen,” she said. “The gap between the super rich and everyone else will widen.”

After class, Professor Isaacs thought back to the email that she had gotten from Ms. Lathion. She said after she read it, she called to make sure her student was all right.

“I watched her as she cried through this screen and I kept thinking if it weren’t for coronavirus, we would be sitting together and I’d be able to physically reach out,” she said. “And I couldn’t do any of that and it was devastating.”

She added: “It’s possible to believe that we can bridge inequalities by coming together on the Haverford campus, or that we can at least soften the edges — and then there is this incredible rupture. I’m very worried about what comes next for them.”

<|endoftext|>

On Thursday, in a public service announcement filmed in his wood-paneled office, Gov. Greg Abbott of Texas gestured toward his most recent executive order propped up in front of him, one that Democrats, health care professionals, and a growing number of Republicans in the state had been clamoring for. Beginning that day, he said, all Texans were required to “stay at home, except to provide essential services or do essential things, like going to the grocery store.”

Just don’t call it a stay-at-home order. “That obviously is not what we have articulated here,” Mr. Abbott stressed when first unveiling the directive on Tuesday. “This is a standard that is based on essential services and essential activities.”

As the coronavirus spreads across the United States, officials like Mr. Abbott, a Republican who was re-elected to a second term in 2018, have been forced to weigh the preventive value of wide-reaching public-health mandates against the economic cost they will inevitably wring. That debate is especially fraught in Texas, where increased calls for collective action find themselves at odds with an abiding ethos of “don’t tread on me.”

It’s a big moment for governors, who, along with having crises to manage, may see their crisis management as a springboard beyond the state capitol. In New York, Andrew Cuomo’s appointment-viewing televised briefings have sparked calls for a presidential run. Michigan’s Gretchen Whitmer already sports a T-shirt emblazoned with President Trump’s coronavirus coinage for her, “That woman from Michigan.”

But unlike many governors, Mr. Abbott’s task is not so much building national political clout from scratch as maintaining the regard he already has. And in Texas, competing passions for how to approach the virus — of which there are currently 5,330 confirmed cases and 90 deaths — are high. So Mr. Abbott, rather than drive a stake down, has focused his energies where he often does: placating all sides.

It’s a reasonable instinct in a state like Texas. The blue wave that defined the 2018 midterm elections crashed here, too, with a surge of Democratic voters and disaffected suburban Republicans flipping decades-long G.O.P. congressional districts, and shrinking the party’s state House majority to a meager (for Texas) 18 seats.

Keen political observers would not have been shocked by the state trending purple, and Mr. Abbott, who won re-election that year with 55 percent of the vote, the most of any Republican on the ballot, is nothing if not keenly political. Beginning as Texas’ attorney general in 2002, Mr. Abbott has mastered the art of governing from the middle, or at least appearing to: For much of his tenure as governor, he has deftly managed to slough off controversy, reaping the political capital of his administration’s more popular decisions and dodging the backlash to its less savory ones.

But Mr. Abbott is poised to own Texas’ response to this moment, for better or for worse. And the quiet, chameleonic nature that has helped propel his political career in the past may now be its chief impediment not just to leading Texans through this crisis, but also reaching the national stage that Republicans in the state believe Mr. Abbott wants.

“Abbott needed to provide a straightforward call to action that could be easily communicated to millions of Texans,” the editorial board of The Austin American-Statesman argued following Mr. Abbott’s executive order on Tuesday. “Instead,” they wrote, “he danced around with semantics.”

If Texans have struggled to pin down Mr. Abbott’s view on the virus, their lieutenant governor has left no uncertainty about his own. Indeed, Americans who regularly tune into Fox News often know where Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick stands on any given issue, and the coronavirus has been no exception. On March 24, Mr. Patrick joined Tucker Carlson’s show to stress the need for Americans to “get back to work” and “back to living” or risk economic collapse. He said that grandparents like him were willing to risk “survival” in order to maintain a strong American economy for their children and grandchildren.

In the past, Mr. Patrick’s brash style has proved useful to Mr. Abbott, allowing the lieutenant governor to become the face of polarizing issues even when Mr. Abbott, the temperamental inverse of Mr. Patrick, might support them himself. Ask Texans about the so-called bathroom bill of 2017, legislation that would have restricted the restrooms that transgender people could use, and they’ll remember Mr. Patrick as its champion, the guy who held news conferences and promoted it on cable news. Less memorable in those scenes is Mr. Abbott, who despite taking great care to telegraph his reluctance, and never meaningfully opining one way or the other, ultimately agreed to call a special session to consider the bill.

Today, however, rather than offering political cover, Mr. Patrick’s strong positions serve mostly to highlight the governor’s strained pursuit of middle ground. It is not that Mr. Abbott has been absent. Many of his decisions have elicited bipartisan praise, including asking health insurers to waive costs of coronavirus testing and telemedicine visits, requesting the expansion of Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program benefits to drive-through restaurants, and increasing hospital capacity.

But before Tuesday, in tossing critical decisions like stay-at-home orders to the local level, Mr. Abbott left county officials to scramble for guidance on how to slow the virus’s spread when strict social-distancing policies were in place in, say, Dallas County, but people were allowed to move freely in Collin County next door. The result, critics say, has been a muddled vision for how Texans should confront this crisis precisely when clarity is most needed.

“Trump’s biggest failing has been in sending mixed messages from the beginning of the coronavirus pandemic,” said Mustafa Tameez, a Democratic strategist based in Houston. Abbott, he argued, has done the same. “At least with Dan Patrick you know where he stands.”

When asked if he regretted not issuing Tuesday’s order earlier, Mr. Abbott did not directly answer the question but instead explained that all of his decisions were the product of close consultation with officials like Vice President Mike Pence and the White House’s coronavirus task force. “All of my decisions have not just been haphazard, but instead have been based upon both data and doctors, and they will continue to be based upon data and doctors,” Mr. Abbott said.

Still, for many Texas Democrats and some Republicans, the time it took for Mr. Abbott to announce a statewide stay-at-home directive has become a key metric by which to judge his leadership in this moment.

Representative Lyle Larson was among the state House Republicans urging a stay-at-home order and “statewide uniformity” more broadly. In an email, he noted that Mr. Abbott and the Texas Department of Emergency Management were “working tirelessly to increase hospital capacity,” but that because of the delays in the processing and reporting of test results — as many as 10 days in some areas — “we are literally ‘flying blind’ on modeling the spread of the disease in our state.”

“This is not a shark attack,” Mr. Larson said. “It is trillions of germs that we can control if we follow the preventive guidelines.”

Some Republicans defended Mr. Abbott’s bottom-up approach as the only viable one in a place like Texas, where driving from one county to another in this state of 28 million can feel like traversing two entirely different worlds.

“He doesn’t want to overreact,” said Austin-based G.O.P. strategist Matt Mackowiak, pointing to Gov. Larry Hogan, who on Monday issued a stay-at-home directive with narrowly-defined exceptions for Maryland, as an example of someone taking an “over the top” approach. Conversely, Mr. Abbott’s measures “make sense, and don’t needlessly infringe on liberties.”

Mr. Mackowiak and others said that Mr. Abbott’s less “aggressive” and “proactive” approach is not indicative of timidity, but instead the deliberative bearing that makes him qualified to lead in times of uncertainty.“He has always made sure we’re kept in our place and not crossing the line,” said Nim Kidd, chief of the Texas Division of Emergency Management, who has worked alongside Mr. Abbott in multiple major emergencies.

But former San Antonio mayor and 2020 Democratic presidential candidate Julián Castro argued that states are either in “safe mode or unsafe mode” as the virus spreads, and that Mr. Abbott, rather than governing on that binary, still seemed focused on finding a political sweet spot. “He’s trying not to lose favor with his base,” Mr. Castro said, adding that, at the same time, the governor was trying to acknowledge the range of expert opinion on how best to stop the spread of the virus.

“The problem is in a situation like this, you can’t have it both ways,” Mr. Castro added. “You can either act decisively, or you can leave your state unsafe. And right now he’s chosen to leave Texas unsafe.”

Mr. Abbott has an incentive to keep the feather-ruffling to a minimum: He’s getting plenty of affirmation from the president. Mr. Trump has favorably name-checked the Texas governor several times in White House briefings, and on March 22, when a reporter asked his thoughts on the lack of a statewide stay-at-home order in Texas, the president said he had “total confidence” in Mr. Abbott. “That’s a great governor,” Mr. Trump said. “He knows what he’s doing.” 

Mr. Abbott’s close relationship with the president would seem a valuable commodity in this moment, as Mr. Trump hasn’t been shy about publicly condemning governors who have criticized his leadership. Governors in those states Mr. Trump is fond of, such as Ron DeSantis in Florida, have seen a speedy turnaround in their requests for masks, respirators and other equipment.

Whether Mr. Abbott has enjoyed the same level of cooperation is less clear. The president was swift to approve Mr. Abbott’s request to issue a major disaster declaration for Texas statewide, the first since 1901. But the state continues to struggle with a dearth of test kits and adequate lab analysis capabilities.

“We’re working well with our federal partners every single day to get as many test kits as possible,” said John Wittman, a spokesman for Mr. Abbott.

Mr. Abbott attained popularity in Texas by trying to appeal broadly, despite the disparate politics of his state, but some wish that instinct could be put on hold in the midst of a crisis. “It does seem that Governor Abbott wants to be liked,” said State Representative Donna Howard, a Democrat and a critical-care nurse by training.

She said she was “very pleased” by the substance of his most recent directive, but was disappointed that he didn’t directly call it a stay-at-home order. That, she said, “speaks to that inability to step up and say what needs to be said.”

Asked how he wanted Texans to remember his leadership in this moment, Mr. Abbott said he didn’t want it to be top of mind. “I want Texans to be thinking about their families and futures and the way they’re rebuilding their lives,” he said. “Texans are the object here.”

<|endoftext|>

LOS ANGELES — Like legions of immigrant farmworkers, Nancy Silva for years has done the grueling work of picking fresh fruit that Americans savor, all the while afraid that one day she could lose her livelihood because she is in the country illegally.

But the widening coronavirus pandemic has brought an unusual kind of recognition: Her job as a field worker has been deemed by the federal government as “essential” to the country.

Ms. Silva, who has spent much of her life in the United States evading law enforcement, now carries a letter from her employer in her wallet, declaring that the Department of Homeland Security considers her “critical to the food supply chain.”

“It’s like suddenly they realized we are here contributing,” said Ms. Silva, a 43-year-old immigrant from Mexico who has been working in the clementine groves south of Bakersfield, Calif.

It is an open secret that the vast majority of people who harvest America’s food are undocumented immigrants, mainly from Mexico, many of them decades-long residents of the United States. Often the parents of American-born children, they have lived for years with the cloud of deportation hanging over their households.

The “essential work” letters that many now carry are not a free pass from immigration authorities, who could still deport Ms. Silva and other undocumented field workers at any time.

But local law enforcement authorities said the letters might give immigrant workers a sense of security that they will not be arrested for violating stay-at-home orders.

“If you have people who perceive that they may be stopped and questioned or deported because of their status, under these circumstances, having that letter makes them feel comfortable,” said Eric Buschow, a captain with the sheriff’s office in Ventura County, where thousands of farmworkers labor in strawberry, lemon and avocado operations. “They can go to work. And their work is essential now.”

The pandemic has also put many of Immigration and Customs Enforcement’s operations on hold. On March 18, the agency said it would “temporarily adjust its enforcement posture” to focus not on ordinary undocumented immigrants, but on those who pose a public safety or criminal threat.

The agency said it would not carry out enforcement actions near health care facilities “except in the most extraordinary of circumstances” and would instead focus its efforts on human trafficking, gangs and drug enforcement.

“Those of us without papers live in fear that immigration will pick us up,” Ms. Silva said. “Now we are feeling more relaxed.”

Across the country, farmworkers have been struggling to understand what the coronavirus outbreak will mean for their safety and livelihoods. Even if they face a lower risk of deportation, many worry that the close working conditions in fields and packing facilities put them at risk for contracting the virus, and some warehouse workers are seeing their hours cut as employers adjust to the shifting market.

For many workers, the fact that they are now considered both illegal and essential is an irony that is not lost on them, nor is it for employers who have long had to navigate a legal thicket to maintain a work force in the fields.

“It’s sad that it takes a health crisis like this to highlight the farmworkers’ importance,” said Hector Lujan, chief executive of Reiter Brothers, a large family-owned berry grower based in Oxnard, Calif., that also has operations in Florida and the Pacific Northwest.

Mr. Lujan, whose company employs thousands of field workers, described them as unsung heroes for guaranteeing that Americans have food security.

“Maybe one of the benefits of this crisis is that they are recognized and come out of the shadows,” said Mr. Lujan, whose company has been lobbying Congress to pass a bill that would legalize immigrant farmworkers.

About half of all crop hands in the United States, more than one million, are undocumented immigrants, according to the Agriculture Department. Growers and labor contractors estimate that the share is closer to 75 percent.

Despite increased mechanization, the agriculture sector has continued to struggle with a dearth of labor because many fruits and vegetables must be harvested by hand to avoid bruising.

In a 2017 survey of farmers by the California Farm Bureau, 55 percent reported labor shortages, and the figure was nearly 70 percent for those who depend on seasonal workers. Wage increases in recent years have not compensated for the shortfall, growers said.

Strawberry operations in California, apple orchards in Michigan and dairy farms in New York and Idaho are wrestling with a shrinking, aging work force, a crackdown at the border, and the failure of Congress to agree on an immigration overhaul that could provide a steady source of labor. A surge in deportations and the voluntary return of many Mexicans to their home country have aggravated the shortage.

As a result, growers increasingly have turned to a seasonal guest-worker program, officially known as the H-2A program, to fill gaps in their labor supply. The number of workers on the visa rocketed to 257,667 in the 2019 fiscal year, compared with 48,336 workers in the 2005 fiscal year.

Growers panicked after the State Department paused all visa processing in Mexico during the public health emergency. In response to an outcry, the department announced on March 26 that it would waive in-person interviews, enabling most applications to be vetted in time for the peak harvest.

American agriculture is at a critical juncture, with a massive volume of produce to be harvested between now and August. In California, citrus fruit is still being plucked off the trees, strawberries are getting underway, and many other crops will ripen in the summer. In Georgia, Vidalia onions and peaches will soon be mature. In Washington, apple trees are heavy with fruit in the summer.

Letters notifying undocumented workers that they are “essential,” when they still officially face potential deportation, are sending the same mixed signals that have long been at the root of American agricultural labor policy, according to many who work closely with the process.

“Some people are really confused by the message,” said Reyna Lopez, executive director of P.C.U.N., a union representing agricultural workers in Woodburn, Ore. “The government is telling them it needs them to go to work, but it hasn’t halted deportations.”

She and other advocates said employers are not doing enough to educate their workers, who often do not speak English, about the coronavirus. “When people don’t understand the risks, they don’t take necessary precautions,” Ms. Lopez said.

The pandemic carries particular risks for agricultural workers. Most do not receive sick pay if they fall ill, and they lack health insurance. The $2 trillion pandemic aid package that passed Congress last week does not offer any assistance to undocumented immigrants.

Armando Elenes, secretary-treasurer of the United Farm Workers, said that letters affirming that workers are “essential” do not substitute for “meaningful steps to stem the pandemic by protecting farmworkers with basic actions.” Those would include, he said, extending sick leave to 40 hours or more, making it easier for workers to claim sick days and providing more aggressive disinfection of work areas.

Some growers, like Reiter Brothers, have trained workers on how to stay healthy, including frequent handwashing and the proper techniques for coughing and sneezing. The company has increased the number of handwashing stations in the fields and spaced out workers who are picking strawberries. The company also offers medical care.

Jim Cochran, a grower of organic berries, artichokes, broccoli and other crops in Santa Cruz, Calif., told his workers that he would keep paying them if they contracted the virus and had to miss work, even for three weeks.

But such policies are exceptions, according to the United Farm Workers.

Agricultural workers in packing warehouses and poultry plants, who often work in close quarters, are both fearful of getting the virus and worried about recent cutbacks that have threatened their ability to work.

Maura Fabian, 48, packs grapes for schools and hospitals in a warehouse in the Central Valley near Fresno, where she said that about half the workers have been let go; the others, she said, including her, have had their hours drastically cut.

Since March 16, Ms. Fabian has worked four-hour shifts most days, and been told not to report at all on other days.

She assumes that her employer has thinned the packing lines because, with schools closed, demand for packed fruit is down. The company is also trying to prevent the spread of the coronavirus among workers, she said.

“We’re afraid of this illness. But we are more afraid that we won’t be able to make a living,” said Ms. Fabian, a single mother who bought a house in October, where she lives with her three children.

In Idaho, where a statewide stay-at-home order began on March 25, dairy owners are scrambling to ensure that the industry’s 8,000 workers, 90 percent of them undocumented, can keep working. Even before the virus, the industry, which needs workers year-round to milk the cows, had been grappling with a labor shortfall.

Rick Naerebout, chief executive of the Idaho Dairymen’s Association, said he had fielded calls from many dairy farmers worried that their workers may be unable to get to work if the authorities begin enforcing domestic travel restrictions. So he has been providing members with a template to print out on official letterhead and distribute to workers, stating that they are now considered essential workers, part of the nation’s critical infrastructure.

“The fact that there is that cognitive recognition that we have to allow these individuals to travel to and from work because they are critical — that’s the complete opposite of what they’ve heard for nearly their entire lives, that they have taken away opportunities from Americans,” he said.

“At the highest level of government, now we’ve seen this be recognized. Whether it’s formal or informal, there’s this acknowledgment that, you’re OK.”

Caitlin Dickerson contributed reporting from New York.

<|endoftext|>

Since Chinese officials disclosed the outbreak of a mysterious pneumonialike illness to international health officials on New Year’s Eve, at least 430,000 people have arrived in the United States on direct flights from China, including nearly 40,000 in the two months after President Trump imposed restrictions on such travel, according to an analysis of data collected in both countries.

The bulk of the passengers, who were of multiple nationalities, arrived in January, at airports in Los Angeles, San Francisco, New York, Chicago, Seattle, Newark and Detroit. Thousands of them flew directly from Wuhan, the center of the coronavirus outbreak, as American public health officials were only beginning to assess the risks to the United States.

Flights continued this past week, the data show, with passengers traveling from Beijing to Los Angeles, San Francisco and New York, under rules that exempt Americans and some others from the clampdown that took effect on Feb. 2. In all, 279 flights from China have arrived in the United States since then, and screening procedures have been uneven, interviews show.

Mr. Trump has repeatedly suggested that his travel measures impeded the virus’s spread in the United States. “I do think we were very early, but I also think that we were very smart, because we stopped China,” he said at a briefing on Tuesday, adding, “That was probably the biggest decision we made so far.” Last month, he said, “We’re the ones that kept China out of here.”

But the analysis of the flight and other data by The New York Times shows the travel measures, however effective, may have come too late to have “kept China out,” particularly in light of recent statements from health officials that as many as 25 percent of people infected with the virus may never show symptoms. Many infectious-disease experts suspect that the virus had been spreading undetected for weeks after the first American case was confirmed, in Washington State, on Jan. 20, and that it had continued to be introduced. In fact, no one knows when the virus first arrived in the United States.

During the first half of January, when Chinese officials were underplaying the severity of the outbreak, no travelers from China were screened for potential exposure to the virus. Health screening began in mid-January, but only for a number of travelers who had been in Wuhan and only at the airports in Los Angeles, San Francisco and New York. By that time, about 4,000 people had already entered the United States directly from Wuhan, according to VariFlight, an aviation data company based in China. The measures were expanded to all passengers from China two weeks later.

In a statement on Friday, Hogan Gidley, a White House spokesman, described Mr. Trump’s travel restrictions as a “bold decisive action which medical professionals say will prove to have saved countless lives.” The policy took effect, he said, at a time when the global health community did not yet “know the level of transmission or asymptomatic spread.”

Trump administration officials have also said they received significant pushback about imposing the restrictions even when they did. At the time, the World Health Organization was not recommending travel restrictions, Chinese officials rebuffed them and some scientists questioned whether curtailing travel would do any good. Some Democrats in Congress said they could lead to discrimination.

In interviews, multiple travelers who arrived after the screening was expanded said they received only passing scrutiny, with minimal follow-up.

“I was surprised at how lax the whole process was,” said Andrew Wu, 31, who landed at Los Angeles International Airport on a flight from Beijing on March 10. “The guy I spoke to read down a list of questions, and he didn’t seem interested in checking out anything.”

Sabrina Fitch, 23, flew from China to Kennedy International Airport in New York on March 23. She and the 40 or so other passengers had their temperature taken twice while en route and were required to fill out forms about their travels and health, she said.

“Besides looking at our passports, they didn’t question us like we normally are questioned,” said Ms. Fitch, who had been teaching English in China. “So it was kind of weird, because everyone expected the opposite, where you get a lot of questions. But once we filled out the little health form, no one really cared.”

In January, before the broad screening was in place, there were over 1,300 direct passenger flights from China to the United States, according to VariFlight and two American firms, MyRadar and FlightAware. About 381,000 travelers flew directly from China to the United States that month, about a quarter of whom were American, according to data from the Department of Commerce’s International Trade Administration.

In addition, untold others arrived from China on itineraries that first stopped in another country. While actual passenger counts for indirect fliers were not available, Sofia Boza-Holman, a spokeswoman for the Department of Homeland Security, said they represented about a quarter of travelers from China. The restrictions, she added, reduced all passengers from the country by about 99 percent.

Mr. Trump issued his first travel restrictions related to the virus on Jan. 31, one day after the World Health Organization declared the outbreak a global health emergency. In a presidential proclamation, he barred foreign nationals from entering the country if they had been in China during the prior two weeks. The order exempted American citizens, green-card holders and their noncitizen relatives — exceptions roundly recognized as necessary to allow residents to return home and prevent families from being separated. It did not apply to flights from Hong Kong and Macau.

About 60 percent of travelers on direct flights from China in February were not American citizens, according to the most recently available government data. Most of the flights were operated by Chinese airlines after American carriers halted theirs.

At a news conference about the restrictions, Alex M. Azar II, the health secretary, repeatedly emphasized that “the risk is low” for Americans. He added, “Our job is to work to keep that that way.”

Health officials also announced an expansion of the screening beyond arrivals from Wuhan. Dr. Robert R. Redfield, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, explained that people would be screened for “significant risk, as well as any evidence of symptoms.” If there was no reason for additional examination, “they would be allowed to complete their travel back to their home, where they then will be monitored by the local health departments in a self-monitoring situation in their home.”

The procedures called for screening to be conducted in empty sections of the airports, usually past customs areas. Passengers would line up and spend a minute or two having their temperature taken and being asked about their health and travel history. Those with a fever or self-reported symptoms like a cough would get a medical evaluation, and if they were thought to have been infected or exposed to the virus, they would be sent to a hospital where local health officials would take over.

Passengers would also be given information cards about the virus and symptoms. Later versions advised people to stay at home for two weeks.

In a statement on Thursday, the C.D.C. described the entry screening as “part of a layered approach” that could “slow and reduce the spread of disease” when used with other public health measures.

“We cannot stop all introductions,” the C.D.C. added, noting that the coronavirus pandemic was “especially challenging due to asymptomatic and presymptomatic infections and an incubation period of up to two weeks.”

Separately, on Friday, the Department of Homeland Security said in a statement that the administration’s measures were “unprecedented” and allowed “the U.S. to stay ahead of the outbreak as it developed.”

Passengers including Mr. Wu described a cursory screening process when they arrived in the United States.

Mr. Wu, who has had no symptoms and has not become ill, said he was told to stay inside for 14 days when he landed in Los Angeles. He said he received two reminder messages the next day by email and text, but no further follow-up.

Another traveler, Chandler Jurinka, said his experience on Feb. 29 had an even more haphazard feel. He flew from Beijing to Seattle, with stops in Tokyo and Vancouver.

At the Seattle-Tacoma airport, he said, an immigration officer went through his documents and asked questions unrelated to the virus about his job and life in China. At no point did anyone take his temperature, he said.

“He hands me my passport and forms and says, ‘Oh, by the way, you haven’t been to Wuhan, have you?’” Mr. Jurinka said. “And then he says, ‘You don’t have a fever, right?’”

Like others, he left the airport with a card that recommended two weeks of self-quarantine and a promise that someone would call to check up on him. He said he never got a call.

Other travelers also said the follow-up from local health departments was hit-or-miss. Some received only emails or texts.

Jacinda Passmore, 23, a former English teacher in China who flew into Dallas on March 10, after a layover in Tokyo, got a thorough screening at the Dallas-Fort Worth airport. It took about 40 minutes, she said, before she was cleared for her flight home to Little Rock, Ark.

State health workers later dropped off thermometers at her house and insisted her entire family stay home for two weeks and provide updates on their condition.

“They asked us every day: ‘Have you stayed inside? Have you met anyone? Have you been quarantined?’” Ms. Passmore said. “They’re really nice about it. They said, ‘If you need anything, we can go grocery-shopping for you.’”

Nineteen flights departed Wuhan in January for New York or San Francisco — and the flights were largely full, according to VariFlight. For about 4,000 travelers, there was no enhanced screening.

On Jan. 17, the federal government began screening travelers from Wuhan, but only 400 more passengers arrived on direct flights before Chinese authorities shut down the airport. Scott Liu, 56, a Wuhan native and a textile importer who lives in New York, caught the last commercial flight, on Jan. 22.

Mr. Liu had gone to Wuhan for the Spring Festival on Jan. 6, but decided to come back early as the outbreak worsened. At the Wuhan airport, staff checked his temperature. On the flight, he and other passengers filled a health declaration form, which included questions about symptoms like fever, cough or difficulty breathing.

After they arrived at J.F.K. in New York, the passengers were directed to go through a temperature checkpoint. “It was very fast,” he said. “If your temperature is normal, they will just let you in.”

Mr. Liu said no one asked him questions about his travel history or health, and he received a card with information about what to do if he developed symptoms. At the time, there were no instructions to isolate. Mr. Liu said he and his friends all decided to do so anyway.

“I stayed at home for almost 20 days,” he said.

About 800 passengers on five charter flights were later evacuated from Wuhan by the U.S. government and directed to military bases, where they waited out two weeks of quarantine.

The charter flights began on Jan. 29. Instagram posts from one showed C.D.C. officials in full protective gear on the plane and escorting passengers after landing.

One group of passengers was eventually flown to Omaha to be taken by bus to a National Guard camp for quarantine. Video showed them accompanied by a full police escort, with lights flashing, helicopters overhead and intersections blocked off along the way.

<|endoftext|>

ATLANTA — Some in Jonesboro, Ark., saw a miracle on Saturday after a tornado roared through town. It tore through businesses already closed by the coronavirus and neighborhoods where people had already been told to social distance by hunkering down at home. Not a soul died. 

Now comes the really hard part: rebuilding and moving on together while officials still urge residents to stay apart.

The tornado gashed a scar of devastation that stretched on for more than four miles, scraping through the heart of the city’s commercial district, destroying hangars at the municipal airport and pulverizing homes in several subdivisions. 

But the morning after the tornado had passed, many acknowledged that the measures that had been put in place to thwart the coronavirus had saved lives in an unintended way. The J.C. Penney and Barnes & Noble stores that typically bustle on weekends were closed. And so were restaurants, which would have been preparing for the early dinner crowd when the tornado hit just after 5 p.m.

“Actually, that’s the blessing,” Bishop Adrian Rodgers, the pastor of Fullness of Joy Ministries, said on Sunday from his empty church, where he has been broadcasting his sermons to a congregation watching on Facebook.

Marvin Day, the judge for Craighead County, of which Jonesboro is the seat, added: “Truthfully, we are feeling very blessed and grateful. Our human tragedies could have been a lot worse.” The authorities said 22 people were injured, but only two were hospitalized. Neither had life-threatening injuries. 

Still, the tornado on its own would have created considerable hardship for a community, which now must rebuild. But it struck at an already difficult moment, as officials were contending with the coronavirus outbreak that had infected six people in Craighead County and caused many residents to lose their jobs or have their working hours reduced. 

“In the midst of this response, maintaining the appropriate posture with regard to Covid-19 is going to be an added challenge,” Representative Rick Crawford, a Republican who represents the area, said at a briefing on Sunday morning. 

As in most of the country, normal routines have been cast aside in an effort to curb the virus. Gatherings of more than 10 people are forbidden. Businesses that were not deemed essential have closed, and restaurants have shut down their dining rooms. Students at the local school district were off last week for spring break, but starting this week, they will be taking online classes, with school canceled until at least April 17. 

“Our community is taking the virus precautions to heart,” said Bobby Long, a city councilman who represents one of the hardest hit areas of the city. 

But the measures were becoming tougher to maintain, with the virus, which remained an invisible and undefined threat for many, being superseded by a disaster that left a path of wreckage that was much more tangible. 

“All of this social distancing, for me now, is over,” said Diane Bizzle, who has asthma and was isolating herself for the past few weeks. “As soon as it passed, all of the neighbors were outside, checking to make sure everyone was OK. You go out and you talk to them. You’re hugging.”

Curtis Brown, 54, worked with a friend to clean up after his fence and pine trees were knocked down and windows were shattered. But he has not let his guard down with the virus. “We’re all doing the elbow bumps,” he said, “and standing a distance from people. Using hand sanitizer. All of that.”

In a city peppered with churches, the tornado was the kind of event that had many people wanting to gather with the rest of their congregations to find solace and community. Bishop Rodgers said that his congregation would continue to support its members in many ways and check on their well-being. But it would have to be at a distance. 

“We certainly want to be good citizens,” he said, adding that he knew of a funeral that had been attended by one person who was sick, which spread the virus to others. “All it takes is for one person to be sick, and many have been affected.” 

As the tornado touched down, moving from south to north, some said they were at home watching the local television news, seeing in real time the funnel forming over the meteorologist’s shoulders. It caused significant damage at the Mall at Turtle Creek and at an Anheuser-Busch granary. Cars were picked up and tossed aside. Part of a freight train was knocked over. 

“All I could hear was just the most horrific exploding,” said Sharon Gore, 60, who could see the destroyed mall from her driveway. “There was so much glass cracking. I couldn’t believe it. I was just calling the name of Jesus over and over again, because I couldn’t even get a prayer out. It was like bombs were dropping.”

Jonesboro, a city of about 75,000 in northeast Arkansas, had been devastated by tornadoes before. A storm in 1968 killed 34 people and injured some 300 others. Another storm in 1973 also left a trail of destruction. Three people were killed, but it was hailed as a “miracle” for not being deadlier.

“If the storm had struck just a few hours earlier, it would have caught hundreds of shoppers in the Carraway Road area, which was pounded with savage fury,” wrote Mike Overall, city editor of The Jonesboro Sun, according to a retrospective published in 2013 by Memphis magazine. “And, everyone shudders to think what would have happened if the twisters had hit during school hours. Nevertheless, the fact that so many lived was a miracle in itself.”

Mr. Long, the city councilman, pitched in on Sunday morning, covering roofs and boarding up windows. He saw residents picking through debris and clearing yards, and others carrying ice chests and handing out drinks and snacks. He said that keeping distance was difficult for residents, just as juggling the tandem emergencies would be for city officials.

“You do what you have to do to meet the need at the moment, and right now, this is what we’re doing,” he said. “We’re doing our best to keep the virus under control. We will not abandon those people who need us the most at this time.”

He said it was painful to go through some of the harder hit areas, seeing the homes destroyed and, with them, lives disrupted. He was also grateful. “Stuff is stuff,” he said. “It’s people that matter.”

His voice broke as he described walking through the subdivision Bridgers Place. He approached one home where the roof had been shaved off and wooden beams inside had splintered. But Mr. Long teared up and had to pause as he recalled looking in one of the windows, where he saw a sign still tacked on the wall. “Blessed,” it said. 

Rick Rojas reported from Atlanta, and Vanessa Swales from New York. Michael Levenson contributed reporting from New York.







 

<|endoftext|>

KEY WEST, Fla. — Days after a harrowing journey to escape a trans-Atlantic cruise where two passengers came down with fatal cases of Covid-19, Jim Nevis is back home in Arizona, fighting the virus in a hospital intensive care unit.

A Canadian family that evacuated from the same Italian ship, the Costa Luminosa, traveled through three airports to get home to Victoria, British Columbia, only to learn that all five of them were infected. Michelle Saunders, who was on the Grand Princess when it docked March 9 in Oakland, Calif., was quarantined on an Air Force base in Georgia, then released two days early with a warning that she and the others could still become ill, and possibly make others sick, too.

Then on Friday, Holland America Line announced that four passengers had died aboard its cruise ship, the Zaandam, after it was refused entry into Chile nearly two weeks ago. The ship, with 53 passengers and 85 crew members aboard displaying symptoms of the coronavirus, was denied permission to transit the Panama Canal and sail on to Fort Lauderdale, Fla.

What would happen to the passengers if they reached Florida was far from clear.

With at least 18 cruise ships still at sea and making their way to shore in the coming days, state and federal authorities have yet to establish a cohesive strategy for evacuating ships and repatriating passengers around the world without exposing them and others to more disease.

Passengers who were either sick or possibly exposed to the virus were in some cases put on buses and planes, endangering others. Quarantine procedures for evacuees were sometimes contradictory and confusing, as the problems of holding passengers in isolation after they returned from their trips became almost as substantial as the danger of letting them go.

“The evacuation definitely helped sicken people and definitely helped spread the disease,” said Paul B. Turner, a golf club professional in Wisconsin who was aboard the Costa Luminosa.

The ship, which set out from Fort Lauderdale bound for Venice, Italy, tried to dock at several ports before unloading in Marseille, France, on March 19. Mr. Turner and the other Americans and Canadians on board flew to Atlanta, then made their way to their home destinations.

While U.S. health authorities took great pains to sequester passengers from affected cruise ships in the early days of the outbreak, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in recent days have allowed hundreds of exposed and ill cruise passengers to travel on commercial flights across the country, potentially jeopardizing everyone from flight attendants to airport restaurant workers, to unwitting fellow passengers.

The reason, C.D.C. officials said, is that the outbreak has entered a “new phase” in which so many people are returning from countries affected by the virus that the priority is to get evacuated passengers home quickly, where they can self-isolate.

“We are at a different stage of a pandemic,” said Benjamin Haynes, a C.D.C. spokesman. “We are doing our best to not allow sick people to get on commercial airlines. But we also have an urgency to return well travelers home as quickly as possible.”

William R. Burke, the chief maritime officer for Carnival Corp., which operates more than 100 cruise vessels around the world, said companies were facing suddenly closed ports, or countries that have abruptly imposed new border rules in response to the coronavirus.

“This week the rules are different than they were a week ago,” Mr. Burke said. “We learned a lot about how to do this, good and bad. I wish I had learned from somebody else doing it.”

Passengers who were part of the chaotic scramble over the past 10 days, under rules that allowed many passengers to navigate their own way home, said that even people who were coughing and clearly sick were packed into buses and planes.

Mr. Nevis, who flew from Atlanta to Phoenix, learned this week that he had Covid-19.

“We were lepers — roaming freely,” said Jane M. Kennedy, who flew to Iowa after sailing on the Costa Luminosa. “God knows how many people we infected.”

James Walker, a lawyer who files lawsuits against cruise companies, said the federal authorities still lack a plan for how to get people home safely.

“I don’t think the C.D.C. has protocols in place,” Mr. Walker said. “Everyone is scrambling around trying to figure things out. It seems to me kind of a Mad Hatter type of environment — no one who is in charge, no one who is taking the lead.”

The cruise ship industry’s battle with the coronavirus erupted in February with an outbreak aboard the Diamond Princess, a vessel owned by Carnival Corp., which was off the coast of Japan. Japanese authorities decided to quarantine the vessel, but at least 700 people got sick and nine died.

The Grand Princess, which in February embarked on a 15-day cruise around the Hawaiian Islands, was diverted to Oakland this month after 21 people fell ill. The authorities evacuated nearly 2,000 asymptomatic people off the ship and took them to military bases in three states, where they complained of unsanitary conditions. Ultimately, 103 passengers tested positive for the coronavirus, and two died.

The U.S. government warned against cruise ship travel on March 8, and a few days later, cruise companies suspended operations worldwide. But 40 ships were still at sea, and few countries wanted them. Port after port refused the ships entry and many countries closed their borders, which complicated efforts to send people home.

One ship, the Coral Princess, which left Chile on March 5, is now making a two-week journey from Uruguay to Fort Lauderdale without making any of its scheduled stops simply because no other country will let its passengers off, even though none are sick, Princess Cruises said.

The Zandaam had been assured it could disembark its passengers in Punta Arenas, Chile, on March 14, Holland America said. But Chile closed its borders and reneged, forcing the ship to make a two-week voyage to Fort Lauderdale. By March 22, passengers started to get sick.

On Friday, a massive evacuation plan was announced to remove the healthy passengers and place them aboard another ship, the Rotterdam, which arrived from Mexico with doctors, Covid-19 tests and medical supplies.

The Costa Luminosa, also a Carnival ship, left Fort Lauderdale on March 5 and dropped off a passenger with flulike symptoms in Puerto Rico three days later, where the passenger subsequently died of Covid-19. The ship continued on to France. Meanwhile, another passenger who had gotten off the ship earlier with heart troubles in Grand Cayman also died of Covid-19.

Carnival put more than 300 Americans and Canadians on a charter flight from Marseille to Atlanta last week. The passengers said they were crammed together on a plane that was repeatedly delayed and held on the tarmac for hours once the authorities learned that three passengers on the flight had tested positive.

The sick were separated and the others were met by C.D.C. officials, who performed what some passengers described as a cursory look at their health: a temperature check. People who had been coughing and feverish for days had taken over-the-counter medications and managed to lower their fever, several passengers said.

“We can talk and walk and that means we are OK?” said Mr. Turner, the Wisconsin golf pro.

A convoy of emergency vehicles had met the plane at a hangar away from the main terminal at Hartsfield-Jackson International Airport, but the passengers who passed the temperature test were then released into the airport, where they stood in long lines at airline counters and sat for hours at gates. One passenger filmed a video showing a group of them at TGI Fridays.

Fabian de la Fuente, the Canadian man who evacuated with his family from the Costa Luminosa, said they were in the international terminal for at least three hours and had lunch at Buffalo Wild Wings. They flew WestJet to Calgary, Alberta, and were there for four hours before flying home to quarantine in Victoria, British Columbia.

He later developed symptoms and tested positive for the coronavirus.

Many of the passengers knew they were sick, Mr. Turner acknowledged, but they were so exhausted and hungry after a 24-hour trek without food that they would have said anything to be allowed to leave.

“I needed to get home,” he said.

Alexandra Bisquertt, of Hollywood, Fla., picked her 76-year-old mother up at the airport after her evacuation from the Costa Luminosa. A day later, her mother had a 103-degree temperature and had to be taken by ambulance to the hospital, where she tested positive for the coronavirus.

“What about the flight attendants? What about the taxi and Uber drivers who picked these people up?” Ms. Bisquertt said. “They did not let one or two sick people out, they released hundreds.”

Ms. Saunders, 24, the passenger who arrived in Oakland aboard the Grand Princess, got home to Illinois on Wednesday after 12 days in quarantine at Dobbins Air Reserve Base, northwest of Atlanta.

“There were two people on my bus that were coughing very heavily, which was a bit concerning,” Ms. Saunders said of the ride off the base.

The C.D.C. released people from quarantine on the base several days earlier than the 14 days originally scheduled on the condition that they not take a plane, train or bus to their destination. One passenger said she was in quarantine on the base for just three days. Mr. Haynes of the C.D.C. said the agency determined that it could accomplish its goal of limiting the spread of Covid-19 by allowing those under mandatory 14-day quarantine at the three bases in Texas, Georgia and California to finish their quarantine at home.

The C.D.C. said its current protocol, revised since the beginning of the outbreak in the United States, is to “recommend that well travelers continue expeditiously on flights home.” Cruise ship passengers are now considered the same as people undertaking other international travel — it is not advised except when essential. They are being told to self-isolate for 14 days, said Mr. Haynes, the C.D.C. spokesman.

Brian Salerno, the Cruise Lines International Association’s senior vice president for maritime policy, said the repatriations were made more difficult because the passengers came from so many countries.

“People tend to focus on them right now because they are very prominent, but realize this is a pandemic that is affecting all modes of transportation, every form of public gathering, hotels and restaurants,” he said. “The potential for exposure is in all of these. I am not sure we are that different from normal life.”

Jenny Gross contributed reporting from New York.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — Remember the impeachment? President Trump does. Even in the middle of a deadly pandemic, he made clear on Saturday that he remained fixated on purging the government of those he believes betrayed him during the inquiry that led to his Senate trial.

The president’s under-cover-of-darkness decision late the night before to fire Michael K. Atkinson, the intelligence community’s inspector general who insisted last year on forwarding a whistle-blower complaint to Congress, swept away one more official deemed insufficiently loyal as part of a larger purge that has already rid the administration of many key figures in the impeachment drama.

Mr. Trump made no effort at a news briefing on Saturday to pretend that the dismissal was anything other than retribution for Mr. Atkinson’s action under a law requiring such complaints be disclosed to lawmakers. “I thought he did a terrible job, absolutely terrible,” Mr. Trump said. “He took a fake report and he brought it to Congress.” Capping a long, angry denunciation of the impeachment, he added, “The man is a disgrace to I.G.s. He’s a total disgrace.”

Mr. Trump’s hunt for informers and turncoats proceeds even while most Americans are focused on the coronavirus outbreak that has killed thousands and shut down most of the country. The president’s determination to wipe out perceived treachery underscores his intense distrust of the government that he oversees at a time when he is relying on career public health and emergency management officials to help guide him through one of the most dangerous periods in modern American history.

“It was a Friday Night Massacre, a purely vindictive decision with no apparent purpose other than punishing the inspector general for doing his job,” said Chris Whipple, the author of “The Spymasters,” a coming history of C.I.A. directors to be published in September. “What’s next? Unmasking the whistle-blower and hauling him into the dock? The signal here to the intelligence community is, do not dare tell the president what he doesn’t want to hear.”

At his briefing on Saturday, Mr. Trump likewise endorsed the firing of Capt. Brett E. Crozier of the Navy, who was removed from command of the aircraft carrier Theodore Roosevelt after sending his superiors a letter pleading for help for his virus-stricken crew. “He shouldn’t be talking that way in a letter,” the president said. “I thought it was terrible what he did.”

While appointed by the president and confirmed by the Senate, inspectors general are government watchdogs traditionally granted a great deal of independence so that they can ferret out waste, fraud and other misconduct in government agencies without fear of reprisal.

But Mr. Trump has demonstrated repeatedly that he has little regard for the positions, which were created by Congress after Watergate to increase government accountability, and expects executive branch officials to serve his interests.

His administration has quarreled with various inspectors general and more than a dozen such positions are currently unfilled. When Mr. Trump signed the $2.2 trillion coronavirus relief package, he issued a signing statement saying he will not allow a special inspector general created by the law to monitor spending to send reports to Congress without his supervision.

On Friday night, even as he fired Mr. Atkinson, Mr. Trump nominated Brian D. Miller, a White House aide, as the special inspector general for the relief spending, raising questions about how beholden he will be to the president in scrutinizing the execution of the largest such stimulus program in history.

Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader, said Mr. Miller’s selection missed the point of what such an oversight official’s mission should be. “To nominate a member of the president’s own staff is exactly the wrong type of person to choose for this position,” Mr. Schumer said on Saturday.

Mr. Schumer’s office released a letter that Mr. Atkinson sent the senator on March 18 in response to concerns about whistle-blowers. “As you know, the past six months have been a searing time for whistle-blowers and for those who work to protect them from reprisal or threat of reprisal for reporting wrongdoing,” Mr. Atkinson wrote. Promised protections are meaningless if whistle-blowers are “vilified, threatened, publicly ridiculed or — perhaps even worse — utterly abandoned by fair weather whistle-blower champions.”

Mr. Trump’s dismissal of Mr. Atkinson was the latest instance of the president continuing to pursue his personal and policy agenda while the nation has been consumed by the pandemic. He rolled back car pollution rules and used the virus to justify tougher controls at the border with Mexico and a new rule undercutting federal unions.

Mr. Trump acted against the inspector general two months after the Senate voted almost entirely along party lines to acquit him on charges of abuse of power and obstruction of Congress stemming from his efforts to pressure Ukraine to incriminate Democrats while withholding desperately needed security aid. But even as he has been managing the pandemic response, impeachment remains on Mr. Trump’s mind.

In a Fox News interview this past week, Mr. Trump blamed Speaker Nancy Pelosi for impeaching him rather than facing the looming coronavirus threat.

“All she did was focus on impeachment,” he said. “She didn’t focus on anything having to do with pandemics, she didn’t focus on — she focused on impeachment and she lost. And she looked like a fool.”

That is a theme Republicans have picked up, arguing that the focus on ousting Mr. Trump over what they called bogus charges distracted the country. “It diverted the attention of the government, because everything every day was all about impeachment,” Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Republican leader, told the radio host Hugh Hewitt.

Mr. Trump, however, denied that it distracted him. “Did it divert my attention?” he replied to a reporter. “I think I’m getting A-pluses for the way I handled myself during a phony impeachment. OK? It was a hoax.”

“I don’t think I would have done any better had I not been impeached. OK?” he added. “And I think that’s a great tribute to something; maybe it’s a tribute to me. But I don’t think I would have acted any differently or I don’t think I would have acted any faster.” Mr. McConnell later told The Washington Post that he meant Congress was distracted, not the government.

The Senate trial ended Feb. 5, just days after Mr. Trump ordered the country closed to most travelers from China, where the virus outbreak began. During the trial and long after it was over, Mr. Trump was playing down the seriousness of the coronavirus, likening it to the ordinary flu and predicting that “like a miracle it will disappear.” It was not until March 11, five weeks after the trial, that he first addressed the nation from the Oval Office, and not until March 13 that he declared a national emergency.

After the Senate trial ended, Mr. Trump began removing officials seen as enemies. The target list was long and varied, including Lt. Col. Alexander S. Vindman, a national security aide who testified before the House under subpoena, and his twin brother, Lt. Col. Yevgeny Vindman, who had nothing to do with impeachment other than being family. Ambassador Gordon D. Sondland, another witness, was removed.

Ambassador William B. Taylor Jr., the acting chief diplomat in Ukraine who also testified, was brought home early. John C. Rood, the under secretary of defense, was ousted. Joseph Maguire, the acting director of national intelligence, was pushed out early. Elaine McCusker, a Defense Department official who questioned the aid freeze had her nomination to be Pentagon comptroller withdrawn. Jessie K. Liu, who prosecuted Mr. Trump’s friend, Roger J. Stone Jr., had her nomination to be under secretary of the Treasury withdrawn.

Mick Mulvaney, the acting White House chief of staff, who admitted at a news briefing that the security aid was held up in part to leverage Ukraine to investigate Democrats (and then tried to take his statement back), was fired on March 6 even as the pandemic was beginning to spread more widely.

As the intelligence community’s inspector general, Mr. Atkinson received the whistle-blower complaint filed last August by a C.I.A. official about Mr. Trump’s dealings with Ukraine. Mr. Atkinson concluded that he was required by law to disclose the complaint to Congress, but the Trump administration initially refused until pressured by lawmakers.

Mr. Trump said on Saturday that Mr. Atkinson should not have forwarded the whistle-blower’s complaint because it was fake, but in fact the bulk of the information included in it was verified by witness testimony and other evidence collected by House investigators.

“Why was the whistle-blower allowed to do this?” Mr. Trump asked. “Why was he allowed to be — you call him fraudulent, or incorrect transcript. So we offered this I.G. — I don’t know him, I don’t think I ever met him. He never even came in to see me. How can you do that without seeing the person? Never came in to see me. Never requested to see me. He took this terrible inaccurate whistle-blower report — right? — and he brought it to Congress.”

Mr. Atkinson’s dismissal on Friday night, a time often used by a White House to bury news it prefers not to gain widespread attention, was disclosed in a letter to Congress but not announced by the White House press office. While it had been anticipated, it still sent waves of concern among lawmakers and intelligence veterans.

“It’s awful. He did everything right,” Gen. Michael V. Hayden, a C.I.A. director under President George W. Bush, said of Mr. Atkinson. Mr. Trump, he added, was flouting the purpose of an inspector general. “He’s just doing it because he can do it.”

Democrats issued statements of protest on Saturday. “Weakening our national security institutions is bad enough during a time of global calm,” said Senator Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California. “During the current instability we’re faced with, it’s particularly dangerous.”

Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, said Mr. Trump should provide more justification for firing an inspector general. “They help drain the swamp, so any removal demands an explanation,” Mr. Grassley said in a statement. “Congress has been crystal clear that written reasons must be given when I.G.s are removed for a lack of confidence. More details are needed from the administration.”

Senator Richard M. Burr, Republican of North Carolina and chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, was more tempered, noting that an inspector serves at the pleasure of the president. “However,” he added, “in order to be effective, the I.G. must be allowed to conduct his or her work independent of internal or external pressure. It is my hope the next nominee for the role of I.C.I.G. will uphold the same important standards laid out by Congress when we created this role.”

As it happened, one inspector general who has earned Mr. Trump’s favor for his report criticizing the F.B.I.’s handling of the Russia investigation stood by Mr. Atkinson. Michael E. Horowitz, the inspector general at the Justice Department and head of the Council of the Inspectors General on Integrity and Efficiency, said Mr. Atkinson was known “for his integrity, professionalism, and commitment to the rule of law and independent oversight.”

“That,” Mr. Horowitz added, “includes his actions in handling the Ukraine whistle-blower complaint.”

transcript

From The New York Times, I’m Michael Barbaro. This is “The Daily.”

Today: President Trump has fired the inspector general for the Department of State, whose investigation posed a threat to his administration. Maggie Haberman on the pattern that that reveals.

It’s Tuesday, May 19.

Maggie, where does the idea of an inspector general come from?

So the idea of inspectors general, who are basically public watchdogs, emerged out of the Watergate era.

I have never been a quitter. To leave office before my term is completed is abhorrent to every instinct in my body.

Richard Nixon resigned in disgrace after abusing his office.

As president, I must put the interests of America first.

Faith in government dipped substantially among the public.

By taking this action, I hope that I will have hastened the start of that process of healing, which is so desperately needed in America.



And this idea came about of permanent government oversight at each federal agency of the executive branch, and each one would have their own watchdog in place. And they are supposed to do audits of operations. They’re investigating reports of waste or fraud or abuse. These oversight officers were essentially a bulwark against corruption, a bulwark against the type of abuses that took place during the Nixon era.

So a kind of internal affairs department inside each agency of the executive branch?

That’s exactly right. Inside each agency of the executive branch was somebody who people could report tips to. And the I.G. could then investigate those and decide whether those were substantiated or not substantiated. And if they decide that there is something real there, they would immediately notify Congress within a week, within seven days. And so there is supposed to be this chain of accountability that exists with the I.G.s.

And the final chain is Congress, so an entirely different branch of government.

Exactly.

And how are these inspectors general regarded after this law is passed?

They are very respected. What was originally 12 inspectors general expanded and became dozens and dozens across the executive branch. And over the years, they have launched investigations into —

Strippers, casinos, Las Vegas — it sounds like a wild bachelor party, but instead, it’s Pentagon employees using their government-issued credit cards.

Wasteful spending into fraud.

A new report by the inspector general at the Department of Homeland Security finds the U.S. citizenship and immigration services, or CIS, improperly granted citizenship —

Into conflicts of interest, into abuse.

The Justice Department released details of a 2004 CIA inspector general’s report detailing chilling interrogation techniques, including waterboarding.

And for the most part, presidents choose not to tangle with them. There are some notable exceptions. Ronald Reagan, for instance, replaced all of the inspectors general on day one. He said that he wanted a clean slate.

Mm-hmm.

George W. Bush raised some eyebrows with how he handled a NASA inspector general, for instance. And then we get to 2009. President Obama had been in office for only a handful of months. And at that point, he abruptly fires the inspector general, Gerald Walpin.

Barack Obama fired Gerald Walpin. He is the inspector general of the Corporation and National Community Service. That is the federal agency responsible for distributing money to organizations like Americorps —

Who was overseeing investigations into Americorps and other national service programs and how money was being spent on them.

He was investigating a close political pal of President Obama’s, but —

And one of the people who Walpin was investigating was the Sacramento mayor and a former N.B.A. basketball star, Kevin Johnson. He was an Obama supporter, and the fact that there was a connection between the president and this person, who is connected to one of the groups that Walpin was looking at, raised a lot of eyebrows.

Well, actually, I was fired, because I was doing my job and doing it well and supporting my staff, who are —

And President Obama alerted Congress that he had lost confidence in Walpin and was going to remove him from that position.

Hmm.

 And did he say why he lost confidence?

He did not get into why he had lost confidence. He didn’t really offer any full explanation.

What we have here is a bigger problem with inspector generals that we got to watch this administration on.

And at the time, Chuck Grassley, the Republican senator from Iowa, who has been very, very assiduous in his support for the I.G.s, was disturbed by what took place.

And I use inspector generals tremendously in my oversight work, so I’m going to fight hard to make sure they maintain their independence.

He said at the time that he thought it looked as if Walpin had been doing a good job, that he had identified a lot of money in America funds that had not been used properly.

Mm-hmm.

The criticism of this move by Obama, it should be remembered, was not just Republicans. Claire McCaskill, senator from Missouri, who was an Obama supporter, was very critical of Walpin’s firing at the time. And this was the last time that Obama did this.

Hmm, so lesson learned. Don’t mess with inspector generals.

Right, or lesson certainly appeared to have been learned. It was, it was a hot stove that he touched, and he never touched it again.

Mm-hmm.

But from there, we got to President Trump, who, throughout his term, has been extremely skeptical of inspectors general.

Why?

He’s a business guy, Michael. He has never been in government before. And the idea of having this in-house adversarial relationship, somebody who works for him but who is there to tell him that he’s doing things wrong, is just a concept that’s anathema to him. And so he has chafed at it and has found it uncomfortable, to put it mildly. And then when they had started to do things that upset him, he becomes very angry. And that is what has led us to this unprecedented moment of, in the last two months, the president waging open war on the inspectors general.



We’ll be right back.

Maggie, tell us about this unprecedented war that President Trump is waging on these inspectors general.

So there have been four inspectors general who he has targeted. And in each case, he has felt some level of threat from each of them it seems. Michael Atkinson was the first one, and what’s important about Atkinson is he is the person who received a whistleblower complaint from an official in the intelligence community, who was detailed to the White House. And this complaint accused the president of an abuse of power related to foreign policy to force Ukraine’s government into announcing investigations related to Joe Biden and his son, that could have personal political benefit for the president. Atkinson found that complaint to be credible enough to have raised a, quote unquote, “urgent concern.” And it, under that label, had to be disclosed to Congress. And this report from Atkinson is what triggered the impeachment inquiry into the president. The president, last fall — before there were actual hearings related to the impeachment, but while Congress was starting to look at this — the president talked to his advisors about firing Michael Atkinson at the time. The president’s advisers told him this was a really bad idea. That if he did this, he was just throwing gasoline on an existing fire. So he waited, and the president was acquitted in the Senate impeachment trial on February 5. And he dismissed Atkinson a handful of weeks later.



And what does the president say when he fires Atkinson? Does he acknowledge that it appears to be an act of retribution for Atkinson’s role in the impeachment?

No, the president does not acknowledge that at all.

I thought he did a terrible job, absolutely terrible.

He says that he has lost confidence in Atkinson, and he says this in a letter to Congress.

He took a whistleblower report, which turned out to be a fake report. It was fake. It was totally wrong. It was about my conversation with the president of Ukraine. He took a fake report, and he brought it to Congress.

That was as much of a reason as Congress was getting.

That man is a disgrace to I.G.s. All right, let’s go.

And I guess as much of a reason as the president needed to give Congress.

All that he needed to say, and the way that he described it in his letter to Congress was, “As is the case with regard to other positions where I, as president, have the power of appointment, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, it is vital that I have the fullest confidence in the appointees serving as inspectors general.” That is no longer the case with regard to this inspector general. That’s as much as they got.

And Maggie, what is the reaction in Congress, and I guess beyond Congress, to this firing of this inspector general?

There was a large outcry.

— course, we’re in the middle of a pandemic, and what is this president doing as thousands of people are dying? He is retaliating against people that are on his enemies list and doing it in the dead of night.

Listen, he got fired for political reasons. He got fired because the president believes that a deep state exists, a group of civil servants that are out to get him. That is not true.

Democrats and even some Republicans said they were enormously troubled by what appeared to be an act of political retribution. But there was no consequence for this president. He’s right. It’s within his power of appointment as president. So he did it again a couple weeks later with another I.G.

And who the second inspector general who was targeted by the president?

Next up was Glenn Fine, who had been the acting inspector general for the Department of Defense since prior to President Trump took office. Now Michael, what was notable about Fine was that was about to become the chairman of a new committee that was going to do oversight on the spending in response to the coronavirus pandemic. This was going to be oversight of $2.2 trillion in coronavirus relief.

So he was going to make sure that money was being properly spent. He was going to account for it.

That’s right. Fine was going to be the watchdog for this massive amount of government spending. The president abruptly moved him out of his office, and therefore he couldn’t be the chairman of that committee.

It seemed as if the president wanted to move out somebody who didn’t report directly to him or who was not promoted by him and not handpicked by him in the first place. That he wanted somebody who more fit that bill to sit on that committee that would be overseeing the spending of this $2.2 trillion.

 Next on the list was the principal deputy inspector for the Department of Health and Human Services, Christi Grimm. She had done a report that was based on a number of interviews with hospitals all over the country, and those pinpointed massive shortages of supplies at various medical centers, efforts and struggles to obtain test kits, gear for hospital workers, ventilators that we’ve heard so much about since.

Despite the nearly 1.8 million tests that you say the United States has done, the inspector general for the Department of Health and Human Services released a report today, a survey, of more than 300 —

The president was really unhappy about this report. What he said to reporters at the time was, it’s just wrong.

I mean a week or longer.

It’s just wrong. Did I hear the word “inspector general“? Really? It’s wrong, and they’ll talk to you about it. It’s wrong.

Many asked about who had written the report.

Well, where did it come from? The inspector general. What’s his name?

It came from the inspector general report —

No, what’s his name? What’s his name?

I don’t know his name off the top of my head.

Well, find me his name. Let me know, OK? If you find me his name, I’d appreciate it.

But sir —

He’s asking reporters for the name of the inspector general who has done something that has upset him.

He was asking reporters to figure out for him — and he was assuming it was a male, it was a woman — who had written this report. Three weeks after Christi Grimm wrote this report, President Trump announced her replacement.

OK, so that brings us, I believe, to inspector general number four. What is the story there?

Inspector general number four, Steve Linick, had, according to Democratic congressional aides, opened up an inquiry into Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and his wife. And whether they were misusing a political appointee at the State Department to serve them, essentially — to perform menial duties like walking their dog, making restaurant reservations, picking up dry cleaning. And at the same time, Linick had been looking into, and was close to finishing, an investigation into Pompeo’s decision to go around Congress with an emergency declaration to approve billions of dollars in arms sales to Saudi Arabia last year. There was an enormous outcry in Congress that this did not go through approval by congressional officials at the time. And Linick was looking into this.

So the issue here is whether or not the State Department kind of created a false sense of urgency around approving an arms sale to the Saudi Arabian government.

That’s exactly right. And that report, as I said, was close to completion. So these two investigations were going on, and we are told that Mike Pompeo told the president that he thought that Linick should be fired. So on Friday, that’s exactly what happened. Another late Friday night ousting of an inspector general, Linick was announced as departed.

What has been the reaction to this firing?

Democrats are very upset about this.

We need to know why an inspector general all of a sudden gets sacked on a Friday night, added to the three other I.G.s that have been sacked.

The fact is if it looks like it’s in retaliation for something that the inspector general is doing, that could be unlawful.

But given what’s happening with coronavirus, given that the attention of the country is largely on either the deaths caused by the virus or the economic devastation caused by the response to dealing with the virus, this has not broken through in the way that it might in any other moment in time.

Hmm, how are Republicans reacting to this ouster?

With the exception of some concern from Chuck Grassley, who’s been consistent about inspectors general, and Mitt Romney, who was very critical and who was the only Republican vote in favor of impeachment against President Trump, there has been radio silence from Republicans on this.

It feels like the events of the past few months reveal a pretty central flaw in the original creation of the inspectors general, which is that it allows the president to fire these independent figures, right? I mean it’s interesting that it was created in the aftermath of Watergate as a check against bad actions in government. And yet, Watergate was all about a president being abusive, and here you have a law that allows a president to fire those internal watchdogs.

Michael, I think you’ve identified the exact problem with this law, which is that it’s only as good as the honor system around it. Because if it’s just another piece of the president’s power, if the president isn’t going to abide by what these inspectors general find and let them do their investigations, then it’s not worth very much.

So the political consequences for the president are, at this point, uncertain for removing these inspector generals. But I’m curious what you think the consequences are for the inspector generals who remain throughout the executive branch. I mean will this affect how they do their job?

Michael, I think that we’re never going to know for certain most likely, but I could see scenarios where inspectors general feel like they can’t open an investigation, because if they do, it’s just going to get shut down. Or they get pieces of information, and they want additional confirmation before they’ll pursue something. It could absolutely have a chilling effect on how these folks do their jobs.



Have any of these fired or dismissed inspectors general spoken out since they lost their jobs?

There was a really remarkable statement that Michael Atkinson, the dismissed intelligence community inspector general, put out. And he defined this as a message he was leaving for, quote, “any government employee or contractor who believes they have learned of or observed unethical, wasteful or illegal behavior in the federal government.” And he had a very dramatic line in it, talking about the significance of his office: “The American people deserve an honest and effective government. They are counting on you to use authorized channels to bravely speak up. There is no disgrace in doing so.” And then he goes on to talk about the importance of whistleblower programs and says, “Please do not allow recent events to silence your voices.”



Maggie, thank you very much.

Michael, thank you.

On Monday, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo acknowledged in an interview that he had asked President Trump to fire the inspector general of the State Department, but said that it was not an act of retaliation. Democrats remain skeptical. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi sent President Trump a letter demanding a detailed explanation for the firing. In the letter, Pelosi called it, quote, “part of a pattern of undermining the integrity of the inspectors general and therefore our government.”

We’ll be right back.

Here’s what else you need to know today.

We must be frank about one of the primary reasons this outbreak spun out of control. There was a failure by this organization to obtain the information that the world needed, and that failure cost many lives.

In a speech at the annual meeting of the World Health Organization, the U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services, Alex Azar, pointedly criticized the group, saying it had mishandled the original outbreak of the virus in China by promoting misinformation from the government there.

The status quo is intolerable. W.H.O. must change, and it must become far more transparent and far more accountable.

At the meeting, leaders of the World Health Organization said that they would review their response to the pandemic, something that several member countries, including the U.S. have demanded. And —

Yeah, I’ve taken it for about a week and a half now, and I’m still here.

During a news conference on Monday, President Trump said that he has been taking doses of hydroxychloroquine as a preventative measure against the virus, despite a lack of evidence that it works.

Can you explain, sir, though, what is the evidence that it has a preventative effect?

Here we go. You ready? Here’s my evidence. I get a lot of positive calls about it. The only negative I’ve heard was the study where they gave it — was it the VA with, you know, people that aren’t big Trump fans gave it, and we’ve done a great —

The Times reports that the president’s disclosure has alarmed doctors, who fear it may encourage Americans to use the drug. The Food and Drug Administration has previously issued a safety warning about the medicine, saying that it can cause serious heart problems and should not be used outside of hospitals or clinical trials.



That’s it for “The Daily.” I’m Michael Barbaro. See you tomorrow.

<|endoftext|>

Good morning.

(Here’s the sign-up, if you don’t already get California Today delivered to your inbox.)

Today, the House is poised to approve the biggest economic stimulus package in modern American history, a $2 trillion plan aimed at helping Americans through the Covid-19 pandemic, just as the United States finds itself at its center.

And for the millions of Americans who have lost work — including more than one million Californians — the relief can’t come quickly enough.

On Wednesday, Gov. Gavin Newsom said that according to early estimates, the legislation would send more than $10 billion just to California and communities around the state, not including direct support to residents.

That money, he said, will help hurting state coffers as California spends billions of dollars on protective equipment and places to house people who must be isolated or who had been living on the streets.

While Mr. Newsom applauded congressional leaders like House Speaker Nancy Pelosi for their work so far, he noted that “there will need to be more in the future.”

For now, though, here are some useful resources to figure out how the stimulus may help you:

Answers to frequently asked questions about expanded unemployment benefits and stimulus payments. [The New York Times]

A breakdown of what’s in the stimulus package, including loans to big corporations and small businesses. [The New York Times]

A calculator to show you how much you could get from the $1,200 (or more) in the coronavirus checks. [The Washington Post]

Capt. John R. Rotruck was somewhere between San Diego and Los Angeles on Thursday night, he told me, set to arrive at L.A.’s port this morning at about 9 o’clock.

Since he was traveling by gigantic boat and not by car, he’d been en route since Monday.

“I’m sitting in my cabin right now,” he said.

Captain Rotruck is the commanding officer of the Mercy, the 1,000-bed U.S. Navy hospital ship heading to the Port of L.A. to alleviate pressure on the region’s health care systems caused by an anticipated surge in coronavirus patients.

Officials have said the medical staff aboard the ship will treat Angelenos with conditions not related to Covid-19, like heart attacks, or who have been in car crashes.

Though the task may sound grim, for many of the roughly 1,000 sailors aboard, including a full-time crew of 61 who maintain the vessel, it’s a new kind of mission, Captain Rotruck said.

“I see a tremendous amount of enthusiasm,” he said. “It’s very unusual for us to be able to do something this directly for the American people.”

Typically, he said, the ship goes out every couple years to provide care or to help build medical capacity in other countries, like the Philippines, Indonesia and Malaysia.

This time, the mission is hitting much closer to home, not just because it’s on American soil, but because many of the crew are based in San Diego.

Captain Rotruck said he didn’t know how long the Mercy would stay in Los Angeles — that’s for state and federal emergency officials to decide — but he said he felt confident in the ship’s initial supply of protective equipment and the crew’s ability to take recommended precautions against the spread of Covid-19.

“We accept a certain amount of risk,” he said. “But we mitigate that risk like any civilian hospital.”

The Mercy, Captain Rotruck said, is in many ways like “a regular hospital.” That’s the comment he occasionally gets from visitors touring the medical facility.

“It just happens to be inside a supertanker,” he said.

If you’ve experienced symptoms of Covid-19 and have tried, unsuccessfully, to get a test in California, we want to hear from you. If you’re feeling well enough, please email us at CAtoday@nytimes.com, and we may reach out. Thank you.

We often link to sites that limit access for nonsubscribers. We appreciate your reading Times coverage, but we also encourage you to support local news if you can.

“Oh my God, she canceled, too.” The coronavirus outbreak has led many to cast aside household workers, who rarely have the kind of protections that come with working for a formal, full-time employer, like paid sick leave. Many household workers are undocumented, leaving their families even more vulnerable. [The New York Times]

Also, the coronavirus has stalled the nation’s asylum system and exacerbated poor conditions for migrants: “How can we ask those people to keep a safe distance and wash hands if they don’t even have access to water?” [The San Diego Union-Tribune]

She seemed like one of the least likely people to get the coronavirus. She lived simply and her daily routine had a small radius. But Azar Ahrabi was the first person in the Bay Area to die from the illness. Her son said it struck “out of the blue.” [The San Francisco Chronicle]

As California’s researchers contend with orders to stay home, what happens to their work? Some scientists have been able to switch to study the coronavirus. Others are just trying to keep their research from being ruined. [CalMatters]

The economy is breaking. We’re trying to turn it off and turn it back on. (But seriously, read this to understand how the recovery might work, and why it’ll be different from past economic recoveries.) [The New York Times]

If you missed it, here’s how big tech could emerge from the Covid-19 pandemic stronger than ever. But those lucky few companies should still be worried. [The New York Times]

How are people dating during the pandemic? Orders to shelter in place are forcing some closer together while others are stuck apart. [KQED]

If you want to read something totally unrelated to anything happening in the world right now, the Internet Archive in San Francisco has opened the National Emergency Library, a digital collection of 1.4 million books you can check out at no cost. [The New Yorker]

Or there’s this profile of the feline “mayor” of Little Tokyo, who turned 23 this month. [The Los Angeles Times]

Also, Meghan Markle and Prince Harry have reportedly left Canada for Los Angeles, Ms. Markle’s hometown. [Reuters]

She was anxious because she couldn’t find hand sanitizer. Her neighbor was running low on toilet paper.

And so, one day recently, Mary Whiteford, 68, and Nancy Dickenson, 64, did a little bartering: “My three rolls of toilet paper for her one bottle of rubbing alcohol!” Ms. Whiteford told me in an email.

The two women, who live in Morro Bay, had run into each other while walking their dogs. They chatted — at a safe distance — and realized this was one way they could help each other through a tough time.

We know gestures like this, big and small, are taking place around California. And we want to hear about them.

So if you’ve been part of an interaction that’s made life a little better for you or for someone else, email us at CAtoday@nytimes.com.

We hope you have a safe, restful weekend.

California Today goes live at 6:30 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com. Were you forwarded this email? Sign up for California Today here and read every edition online here.

Jill Cowan grew up in Orange County, graduated from U.C. Berkeley and has reported all over the state, including the Bay Area, Bakersfield and Los Angeles — but she always wants to see more. Follow along here or on Twitter, @jillcowan.

California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and graduated from U.C. Berkeley.

<|endoftext|>

The Department of Homeland Security has extended the deadline for Real ID enforcement by 12 months because of the Covid-19 pandemic, postponing an already delayed government requirement for enhanced identification to board domestic flights.

The new deadline is Oct. 1, 2021, one year from the previous date, Chad Wolf, acting secretary of the Department of Homeland Security, said in a statement on Thursday.

“The federal, state and local response to the spread of the coronavirus here in the United States necessitates a delay in this deadline,” Mr. Wolf said. “Our state and local partners are working tirelessly with the administration to flatten the curve and, therefore, we want to remove any impediments to response and recovery efforts.”

The extended deadline will also allow the department to work with Congress to carry out needed changes to expedite the issue of Real IDs, he said.

The virus’s spread in the United States, where there are more than 1,000 deaths and at least 85,000 cases reported, has prompted states across the country to temporarily close or restrict access to motor vehicle offices, Mr. Wolf said.

On Thursday, California’s Department of Motor Vehicles announced that it would close all of its more than 170 field offices starting Friday.

Offices in New York, whose more than 38,000 coronavirus cases are by far the most reported in any state, closed on March 21 at the direction of Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo. Offices in Virginia, Texas and Florida also closed their doors to the public last week, delaying for millions any chance to apply for a Real ID.

However, this week, driver-licensing offices in Washington State began allowing appointment-only visits for transactions that cannot be done online, over the phone or by mail.

The coronavirus outbreak is only the latest hurdle facing the Real ID nationwide rollout. In addition to long lines at D.M.V. offices, a July 2019 survey conducted for a travel industry group said most Americans did not have or were confused about Real ID.

The Real ID Act was passed by Congress in 2005 to increase security measures for state-issued personal identification cards, mainly driver’s licenses, that can be used to access airports, military bases and nuclear installations. The law was one of several steps taken by the federal government to strengthen identification procedures after Sept. 11, 2001, in part because some of the 9/11 hijackers had obtained driver’s licenses based on bogus documentation.

In order to receive a Real ID-compliant license, the Department of Homeland Security requires people to provide documentation showing their full legal name, date of birth, Social Security number, two proofs of address of principal residence and lawful status. Some states may require additional information.

Since the act was announced, some groups, including the American Civil Liberties Union of New York, have expressed concerns. The organization said the act could force hundreds of thousands of immigrants to lose their driver’s licenses because of errors made by D.M.V. agents who are required to sort through complex immigration laws.

The rollout has been delayed many times over the years after some states complained that the original deadline of 2008 was unreasonable.

Tori Emerson Barnes, an executive vice president at the U.S. Travel Association, a nonprofit representing the travel industry, said that according to the organization’s research, as many as 79 million Americans are not Real ID-compliant.

“Right now, we are obviously suffering major, catastrophic damage within the travel and tourism industry as a result of the public health crisis, Covid-19,” Ms. Barnes said on Friday.

The travel association praised the decision to extend the deadline, but said another extension may be required.

“We need to recover from the public health crisis and so we should consider where we are economically next year — that Real ID may have to be further delayed because we don’t need to do anything that would prevent folks from traveling once you get the all-clear,” Ms. Barnes said.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — Peter T. Gaynor, the federal government’s top emergency manager, was about to go on television last week to announce that he would use wartime production powers to ensure the manufacture of about 60,000 desperately needed coronavirus test kits.

With minutes until the camera went live, though, he still had to let the White House know. The person he hurriedly called: Jared Kushner, the president’s son-in-law and senior adviser, who endorsed an announcement that surprised many officials. Among those unaware that Mr. Kushner had agreed to the use of the special powers? President Trump.

At one of the most perilous moments in modern American history, Mr. Kushner is trying in a disjointed White House to marshal the forces of government for the war his father-in-law says he is waging. A real estate developer with none of the medical expertise of a public health official nor the mobilization experience of a general, Mr. Kushner has nonetheless become a key player in the response to the pandemic.

Because of his unique status, he has made himself the point of contact for many agency officials who know that he can force action and issue decisions without going to the president. But while Mr. Kushner and his allies say that he has brought more order to the process, the government’s response remains fragmented and behind the curve.

Some officials said Mr. Kushner had mainly added another layer of confusion to that response, while taking credit for changes already in progress and failing to deliver on promised improvements. He promoted a nationwide screening website and a widespread network of drive-through testing sites. Neither materialized. He claimed to have helped narrow the rift between his father-in-law and General Motors in a presidential blowup over ventilator production, one administration official said, but the White House is still struggling to procure enough ventilators and other medical equipment.

Perhaps most critical, neither Mr. Kushner nor anyone else can control a president who offers the public radically different messages depending on the day or even the hour, complicating the White House’s effort to get ahead of the crisis. One moment Mr. Trump is talking about reopening the country by Easter, the next he is warning of more than 100,000 deaths. In the afternoon, he threatens to quarantine tens of millions of people in the Northeast, then in the evening he backs down.

In an interview, Mr. Kushner would not discuss the president’s actions but said he viewed himself as an enabler of government agencies to overcome obstacles. “From the White House, you can move a lot faster,” he said. “I’ve put members of my team into a lot of components. What we’ve been able to do is get people very quick answers.”

But to some in the agencies, his team’s arrival has only exacerbated an already dysfunctional situation. In recent days, administration officials said, the Federal Emergency Management Agency, which traditionally coordinates the government’s responses to disasters, has received surprise directives from the White House — including to dispatch deliveries of medical equipment to states that had not even submitted formal requests based on which governor got Mr. Trump on the telephone.

After the governors of Illinois and New Jersey called Mr. Trump last month, Mr. Kushner’s team told FEMA to immediately deliver medical equipment to both states even though the career officials were concerned that would redirect valuable medical necessities away from where they were most needed, such as the coronavirus hot spot of Washington State. Agency officials had to call the states’ emergency managers to ask them to submit formal requests for supplies the White House had already promised.

“There is some kind of communications failure between FEMA and the White House,” said Representative Bennie G. Thompson, Democrat of Mississippi and chairman of the House Homeland Security Committee. “FEMA was brought into the response to provide logistics support and the White House should let them do their work. There is no reason for Jared or any other inexperienced person to be getting in the way of that.”

Administration officials anticipate that Mr. Kushner’s role is likely to be a focus of the new select committee Speaker Nancy Pelosi announced on Thursday to investigate the administration’s response to the coronavirus.

Normally out of public view, Mr. Kushner made a rare appearance on camera on Thursday, joining his father-in-law’s daily briefing on the virus to describe his own efforts. “The president also instructed me to make sure that I break down every barrier needed to make sure that teams can succeed,” Mr. Kushner said, adding a complaint that states had been imprecise in their estimates of needed supplies.

Since jumping into the crisis in mid-March, Mr. Kushner has focused on coordinating a scattershot government effort — first to improve testing, where progress has been made, and then to obtain more medical equipment, which remains a major problem for hospitals. His team organized an airlift of 22 scheduled flights of gloves, masks, gowns and other medical supplies from China, the first touching down in New York on Sunday.

Mr. Kushner has embedded dozens of political appointees and recruits from the private sector in critical spots like FEMA. His “impact team,” as he calls it, has been nicknamed the Slim Suit Crowd for its sartorial preferences by khaki-wearing FEMA veterans.

Mr. Kushner’s allies said that he had made progress in improving coordination and that it was hardly surprising that agency bureaucrats bristle at outsiders suddenly arriving to push them to speed up or bypass their usual processes.

Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York, a Democrat who has both sought to work with Mr. Trump and at times sharply criticized his administration, praised Mr. Kushner last week. “He’s been extraordinarily helpful on all of these situations,” Mr. Cuomo said at a news briefing.

Mr. Kushner has long been one of the most powerful players in Mr. Trump’s West Wing, taking on a broad portfolio with mixed results. He is credited with helping to push through bipartisan criminal justice legislation that shortened sentences for some drug offenders and expanded job training for prisoners, but his much trumpeted bid to broker Middle East peace has gone nowhere.

His influence has only grown during a power vacuum inside the West Wing. Mr. Trump abruptly fired Mick Mulvaney, the acting White House chief of staff, on March 6, even as the coronavirus pandemic was growing. The president named Representative Mark Meadows, Republican of North Carolina, to replace him, but Mr. Meadows waited more than three weeks to resign his seat and only formally assumed his new post on Tuesday.

Into that void stepped Mr. Kushner, who enlisted friends with glossy entrepreneurial backgrounds to help, including Adam S. Boehler, the head of the U.S. International Development Finance Corporation, a foreign aid agency. Mr. Boehler, the founder of an in-home medical provider start-up and the former director of the innovation center at the federal government’s Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, joined Brad Smith, who currently holds that job, and Nat Turner, a software entrepreneur.

Mr. Turner once ran a snake-breeding business out of his childhood bedroom before growing up to help found and later sell Flatiron Health, a technology company that works with cancer patients and oncologists. In his efforts to help with the administration’s response to the pandemic, he has involved Flatiron employees, who have issued orders to health agencies, stirring resentment, according to a senior administration official involved in meetings.

The culture clash between public and private sectors has been jarring. The senior official described the Kushner team as a “frat party” that descended from a U.F.O. and invaded the federal government. To government officials, the outsiders demonstrated a lax attitude to policy discussions, at one point using the website FreeConferenceCall.com to arrange high-level meetings. Others have used personal email accounts in delicate policy exchanges.

That has prompted criticism from watchdog groups who say such practices are not secure and violate federal laws intended to preserve such communications.

“There is no excuse for hiding information from the public that affects their lives in an extraordinary time,” said Noah Bookbinder, the executive director of Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington, a watchdog group often critical of the Trump administration.

The emergency situation has also led to questions about the merging of private and public interests. Some producers of the malaria drug chloroquine who know Mr. Kushner have invoked his name with administration officials to press for a quicker means of production on the unproven coronavirus treatment promoted by Mr. Trump.

After the president, at Mr. Kushner’s urging, made a splashy announcement last month that Google was helping build a national screening website to direct Americans to testing locations, it turned out there was no such national site anywhere close to being unveiled by Google.

But Oscar Health, a health insurance company founded in part by Mr. Kushner’s younger brother, Joshua, did work on such a website at the government’s request before dropping the project, according to The Atlantic. Jared Kushner partly owned or controlled Oscar before joining the White House and Joshua Kushner remains a major investor in the firm, as does Google’s parent company.

Mr. Trump, according to two people familiar with the events, unleashed his fury at Mr. Kushner over the debacle related to the Google website the weekend after his announcement, a level of anger that the president’s son-in-law has rarely endured and that seemed to knock him off balance briefly. (Mr. Kushner’s allies insist Mr. Trump calmed down and moved on once Google issued a statement about the website.)

Weeks later, the website that was eventually developed by another firm owned by Google’s parent company still operates in only four California counties. Likewise, Mr. Kushner’s effort to open an array of drive-through testing sites has resulted in just five locations, at a Rite Aid in Pennsylvania, two Walmarts and a Walgreens in the Chicago area and a CVS in Massachusetts, each of which were set up to run only 250 tests a day, according to two government officials.

While senior FEMA officials, including Mr. Gaynor, the agency administrator, privately complain that Mr. Kushner’s team is disrupting their operations, they describe Mr. Kushner himself as helpful. He arrived at planning meetings in recent weeks prepared with data sets that FEMA officials did not think to ask for, including models for expanding the emergency response. Some expressed relief that Mr. Kushner’s arrival meant someone at the White House was finally in charge of operational activity.

“Mr. Kushner and his team, from the White House Office of American Innovation, have played an integral role by facilitating close coordination between the federal government and the private sector during this critical time,” said Lizzie Litzow, a FEMA spokeswoman.

Last week, according to two officials involved in the situation, Mr. Kushner was told that FEMA was finding medical equipment to buy overseas but could not get quick payment authority. Mr. Kushner, they said, canceled his meetings and went to FEMA headquarters, where he asked to have the official involved brought to him to explain the holdup.

Mr. Kushner then enlisted Russell T. Vought, the director of the Office of Management and Budget, and told Pat A. Cipollone, the White House counsel, not to return to the White House until he figured it out, setting a noon deadline. By 11:30 a.m., according to the officials, Mr. Kushner was told it was resolved.

Mr. Kushner early on agreed with his father-in-law that the news media was hyping the coronavirus to attack the president, according to several officials. Although people close to him deny that he failed to take the virus seriously at first, Mr. Kushner shares the president’s view that governors are driving their residents into a panic by airing worst-case projections of medical needs.

In conversations with advisers to the president, many of whom were stunned by the remark, Mr. Kushner has stressed what he considers his own abilities, saying that he has figured out how to make the government effective.

Despite the views of staff members who see Mr. Kushner as a novice at government, Mr. Kushner still views himself as a person who can fix things. “I learned very early on that when you try to work around an existing government structure, it rarely works,” Mr. Kushner said in the interview. “You have to take the machinery that exists and empower it rather than recreate it.”

Peter Baker, Zolan Kanno-Youngs and Noah Weiland reported from Washington, and Maggie Haberman from New York. Kitty Bennett contributed research.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — The captain of an American aircraft carrier deployed to the Pacific Ocean has pleaded with the Pentagon for more help as a coronavirus outbreak aboard his ship continues to spread, officials said Tuesday. Military officials say dozens of sailors have been infected.

In a four-page letter dated Monday, first reported by The San Francisco Chronicle on Tuesday, Capt. Brett E. Crozier laid out the dire situation unfolding aboard the warship, the Theodore Roosevelt, which has more than 4,000 crew members. He described what he said were the Navy’s failures to provide him with the proper resources to combat the virus by moving sailors off the vessel.

“We are not at war,” Captain Crozier wrote. “Sailors do not need to die. If we do not act now, we are failing to properly take care of our most trusted asset — our sailors.”

The carrier is currently docked in Guam.

Thomas B. Modly, the acting Navy secretary, told CNN in an interview that the Navy was working to move sailors off the ship — but that there were not enough beds in Guam to accommodate the entire crew.

“We’re having to talk to the government there to see if we can get some hotel space, create some tent-type facilities there,” Mr. Modly said. “We’re doing it in a very methodical way because it’s not the same as a cruise ship.”

Speaking to reporters Tuesday night, the commander of the Pacific Fleet, Adm. John C. Aquilino, said that “we’re welcoming feedback” regarding the requests outlined by Captain Crozier.

Admiral Aquilino said that crew members would be rotated off the carrier for testing and quarantine before returning aboard. The intent, he said, was to keep the ship ready to carry out its missions. He said that no crew members had been hospitalized thus far, but he declined to specify the number of infections.

In his letter, Captain Crozier had recommended offloading his entire crew, and then quarantining and testing them while the ship was professionally cleaned.

The problem aboard the Roosevelt highlights a central dilemma facing the military: Top officials, who have spent years placing readiness to fight the next war as a top priority, are now finding that maintaining that readiness during a pandemic can endanger the health, and even the lives, of service members. At the same time that Americans are being told to stay at home and practice “social distancing” in public, many service members are instead being told to continue doing their jobs.

The mixed messages have emerged across the armed services. Last week, the Army ordered a halt to most training, exercises and nonessential activities that require troops to be in close contact, but abruptly reversed itself days later, even as the infection rate in the American military rose. Defense Secretary Mark T. Esper has insisted that the armed forces find a way to protect troops from the rampaging virus while performing the military’s essential operations.

The crisis aboard the Roosevelt played out like a slow-moving disaster and highlights the dangers to the Pentagon if the coronavirus manages to infiltrate some of its most important assets, such as bomber fleets, elite Special Operations units and the talisman of American military power, aircraft carriers.

In a statement, a Navy official said that the commanding officer of the Roosevelt “alerted leadership in the Pacific Fleet on Sunday evening of continuing challenges in isolating the virus.”

“The ship’s commanding officer advocated for housing more members of the crew in facilities that allow for better isolation,” the statement said. “Navy leadership is moving quickly to take all necessary measures to ensure the health and safety of the crew of U.S.S. Theodore Roosevelt, and is pursuing options to address the concerns raised by the commanding officer.”

At its core, the issue on the Roosevelt and other warships stems from the near impossibility of putting adequate social distance among people to stop the spread of the illness. The enormous ship, about 20 stories high, is its own city, but one with an extremely dense population.

Life aboard the Roosevelt means learning to live on top of other people: Many of the berths where sailors sleep include bunk beds. Hallways and doorways are cramped. Bathrooms and cafeterias are shared areas. Low ceilings and narrow, ladderlike stairwells that require the use of hands to maneuver up and down all contribute to an ever-present opportunity to spread the virus.

The flight deck of the Roosevelt, on the other hand, is enormous. The Navy likes to describe its carriers as five acres of sovereign territory. But the Navy imposes strict limits on how many people can be on the flight deck at any time.

Navy officials have acknowledged the dangers that ships pose during an outbreak of an infectious disease. As the world has seen with cruise ships, viruses can spread with frightening ease aboard these vessels. That is one reason Navy officials have been doing all they can to keep the hospital ship Comfort virus-free during its current mission in New York, where it is taking patients with other medical problems to relieve hospitals overrun by coronavirus patients.

In his letter, Captain Crozier clearly outlined the challenge. “None of the berthing aboard a warship is appropriate for quarantine or isolation,” he wrote.

A senior Navy official on Sunday sought to play down the urgency of the situation on the Roosevelt, saying that while it was unfortunate, most of the reported symptoms among the sickened sailors and other crew members had been mild.

Mr. Modly, the acting Navy secretary, defended the ship’s decision to have made a port call in Da Nang, Vietnam, despite the spread of the virus across Asia. He said that, at the time, coronavirus cases in Vietnam numbered fewer than 100 and were in the north of the country, around Hanoi. Port calls for Navy ships have since been canceled.

Maj. Gen. Jeff Taliaferro, the vice director for operations with the Joint Chiefs of Staff, acknowledged on Monday that there had been news reports about the coronavirus aboard the Roosevelt. He declined to go into details for security reasons, he said.

But, echoing a line that the military has consistently taken during the pandemic, General Taliaferro insisted that the Roosevelt could nonetheless perform its missions. If the Roosevelt had to sail immediately, he told reporters on a conference call, it was “ready to sail.”

Eric Schmitt contributed reporting.

<|endoftext|>

As the coronavirus pandemic has worsened, the American Society for Reproductive Medicine (A.S.R.M.) issued new guidelines on March 17, advising its more than 8,000 members to avoid starting new treatment cycles for I.V.F., IUI and egg freezing; consider canceling embryo transfers; and suspend all nonemergency surgeries. It made an exception for patients who have urgent needs.

The A.S.R.M. will re-evaluate its guidelines at the end of March at the latest. But given how quickly the coronavirus is spreading, it’s unclear if the recommendations will be reversed then.

If you’ve had to cancel a fertility treatment because of coronavirus, we’d like to hear from you. Please fill out the form below.

A reporter or editor may contact you. Your information will not be published without your consent. 

<|endoftext|>

This is the Coronavirus Briefing, an informed guide to the global outbreak. Sign up here to get the briefing by email.

The White House released models that project a stunning toll: millions of coronavirus cases and between 100,000 and 200,000 deaths in the U.S.

The C.D.C. is considering telling many more people to wear masks.

March ended as the worst month on Wall Street since 2008, with the S&P 500 index down 12.5 percent.

Close to home: Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York says his brother Chris Cuomo, the CNN anchor, has the virus.

Get the latest updates here, plus maps and full coverage

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is having second thoughts about masks.

For weeks, it (and we) said that ordinary citizens in the U.S. did not need to wear them unless they were sick and coughing or were caring for someone who was.

Now, with the number of cases in the U.S. doubling every three or four days, it looks as though that may not have been the best advice.

New data cited by Dr. Robert Redfield, the director of the C.D.C., shows high rates of transmission by people who are infected but don’t know it yet. An infected person can be contagious for 48 hours before developing symptoms, if they get them at all. Having a mask on could cut down on the number of transmissions from asymptomatic people.

So the C.D.C. is now considering whether to recommend that more people — maybe everybody — wear a mask when out in public.

Not a high-grade N95 medical mask, though. Those are scarce and should still be saved for those who need them most, medical professionals and others on the front lines. One reason the C.D.C. hesitated to advise universal mask-wearing was to avoid making shortages of those masks even worse.

But for this purpose, you don’t need that type; ordinary surgical masks and even homemade masks will do. They will help slow transmission in the community, even though they don’t ensure complete protection for the wearer.

And there’s a side benefit: Wearing any kind of mask, even a bandanna, will make you less likely to touch your face — an important route for infection.

Make your own mask. It isn’t difficult, and you may already have everything you need at home. Here’s a guide.

The Times is providing free access to much of our coronavirus coverage, and our Coronavirus Briefing newsletter — like all of our newsletters — is free. Please consider supporting our journalism with a subscription.

The coronavirus is spreading quickly in America’s jails and prisons, and it’s easy to see why: Social distancing is impossible, hand sanitizer is widely banned, medical care is already strained and, for most of the staff, there’s no working from home.

So with hundreds of coronavirus cases already confirmed in federal and state prison systems and local jails, the authorities have been releasing thousands of inmates to try to slow the infection and to save lives.

Cook County, Ill., which includes Chicago, is aiming to release 2,000 inmates. New Jersey says it will release as many as 1,000. New York has already released about 650 people. Cleveland has halved its county jail population, to about 1,000.

The criteria vary for deciding who gets out. Examples include people over 50, people near the ends of their sentences and people convicted or facing trial for nonviolent misdemeanors or low-level felonies.

“De-densifying” the cell blocks also means taking fewer people in. Sheriff’s deputies in some areas have been told to make fewer arrests, and some prosecutors have said they will decline to prosecute certain low-level cases, like trespassing, drug possession and urinating in public.

“That’s not going to increase crime,” Marilyn Mosby, Baltimore’s chief prosecutor said. “The thing that we’re concerned with is public safety, and we don’t want to prescribe someone with substance-use disorder to a death sentence.”

Cities and countries in Asia that seemed to have brought their outbreaks under control are bracing for a possible second wave of infections.

China, Hong Kong, Singapore and Taiwan closed their borders to foreigners after they saw surges in new cases tied to international travelers. Japan has barred visitors from most of Europe, and South Korea is quarantining foreigners in government centers for 14 days after arrival.

It’s a troubling sign for the United States, Europe and other places that are still battling their first wave. Success with containment can be tenuous, and the world may have to remain on a kind of indefinite lockdown until a vaccine or treatment is developed.

“Even countries that have been relatively successful in managing the pandemic are only as safe as the weakest links in the system,” said Kristi Govella, an assistant professor of Asian studies at the University of Hawaii, Manoa.

What’s going on in North Korea? The secretive country claimed not to have a single coronavirus case, though a prominent defector called that a “blatant lie.” Decades of isolation and international sanctions have ravaged​ North Korea’s health system, raising concerns that ​the country lacks the capacity to fight an outbreak.

The United States has now reported more deaths linked to coronavirus — 3,305 — than China has, though there is widespread skepticism about China’s official tally.

There are dozens of cases aboard the U.S.S. Theodore Roosevelt, an aircraft carrier in the Pacific, and the captain is urgently requesting help.

Louisiana reported more than 150 deaths in 24 hours. State officials in Michigan reported 50 deaths on Monday and said the outbreak there was still in its early stages.

Around 2,000 nurses, 500 paramedics and emergency medical technicians, and 250 ambulances are heading to New York City from across the United States to help combat the virus. 

The rent is due. Tomorrow is the first of the month. If your finances are strained because of the outbreak, there is help available for paying your bills, including utilities, housing payments and student loans.

Dealing with quaranteenagers? Parenting a young adult in close quarters can be tough. Try to give them privacy, expect friction in their social lives and allow space for sadness.

Reimagine your living space. Our guide can help you make room for your home office, prepare for a disaster or tidy up. For the truly restless during quarantine, try our tidy home challenge.

Think you might have a fever? Here’s what your temperature can tell you — and some signs of fever to look for if you can’t find a thermometer.

White House economists warned last fall that a pandemic could kill half a million Americans and devastate the economy — but their study went unheeded.

Workers are striking at companies like Instacart, Whole Foods and Amazon over what they say are inadequate safety measures and insufficient pay for the risks they face.

The Food and Drug Administration has approved a test that can detect the coronavirus in about two minutes, Reuters reports.

“Those We’ve Lost” is a new series from The New York Times obituaries desk that tells the stories of people who have died from the coronavirus.

Retired doctors and nurses are returning to the job to fill in for health care workers who have become infected. Here are a few of their stories.

A thriller about the coronavirus was filmed just before life was shut down to restrain the pandemic.

We’ve been getting into the national forests with our Border collie Willy. We rarely encounter anyone — Western Oregon is blessed with public forestlands — and focusing just on what’s right around us, we can go quite awhile without thinking of “it.” Willy, blissfully unaware of any crisis, is joyfully in the present all day.

— Tim Baxter, Eugene, Ore.

Let us know how you’re dealing with the outbreak. Send us a response here, and we may feature it in an upcoming newsletter.

Sign up here to get the briefing by email.

Jonathan Wolfe and Tom Wright-Piersanti contributed to today’s newsletter.

<|endoftext|>

The coronavirus is spreading quickly in America’s jails and prisons, where social distancing is impossible and sanitizer is widely banned, prompting authorities across the country to release thousands of inmates in recent weeks to try to slow the infection, save lives and preserve medical resources.

Hundreds of Covid-19 diagnoses have been confirmed at local, state and federal correctional facilities — almost certainly an undercount, given a lack of testing and the virus’s rapid spread — leading to hunger strikes in immigrant detention centers and demands for more protection from prison employee unions.

A week ago, the Cook County jail in Chicago had two diagnoses; by Sunday, 101 inmates and a dozen employees had tested positive for the virus. A nearby Illinois state prison reported a coronavirus-related death on Monday, and Michigan prisons had 78 positive tests. The Rikers Island jail complex in New York City had 167 confirmed cases among inmates by Monday. And at least 38 inmates and employees in the federal prison system have the virus, with one prisoner dead in Louisiana.

“It’s very concerning as a parent,” said William Brewer Jr., whose son is serving time for robbery in Virginia. “He’s in there sleeping in an open bay with 60 other people. There’s no way they can isolate and get six feet between each other.”

Defense lawyers, elected officials, health experts and even some prosecutors have warned that efforts to release inmates and to contain the spread of the disease are moving too slowly in the face of a contagion that has so far infected at least 156,000 people in the United States, with more than 2,500 known deaths.

“By keeping more people in the jails, you are increasing the overall number of people who contract the virus,” and the demand for hospital beds, ventilators and other lifesaving resources, said David E. Patton, head of the federal public defender’s office in New York City, which represents nearly half of the 2,500 inmates in the city’s two federal jails. “They are playing roulette with people’s lives.”

America has more people behind bars than any other nation. Its correctional facilities are frequently crowded and unsanitary, filled with an aging population of often impoverished people with a history of poor health care, many of whom suffer from respiratory problems and heart conditions. Practices urged elsewhere to slow the spread of the virus — avoiding crowds, frequent handwashing, disinfecting clothing — are nearly impossible to carry out inside.

“Even as a visitor,” said Mr. Brewer, “if you want to wash your hands, you’ve got to walk out and go into another building to do it.”

The federal Bureau of Prisons, which holds more than 167,000 people nationwide, has been criticized by its own employees as slow to act. On Friday, dozens of public health experts sent a letter to President Trump urging him to take immediate steps to protect inmates and immigration detainees.

Attorney General William P. Barr said officials were trying to expand home confinement, as opposed to directly releasing federal prisoners, almost all of whom were convicted of felonies. He ordered an assessment of at-risk nonviolent inmates, particularly those who have served much of their sentence.

But it was unclear how many would qualify under a complex list of criteria. And Mr. Barr cautioned that the review would not result in immediate transfers because of the need to ensure that prisoners would not spread the virus once freed.

In Chicago, as the number of positive test results at the county jail has skyrocketed, the sheriff, Tom Dart, has established a quarantine area for those who have the virus, and another one for those showing symptoms who have not tested positive but need to be monitored. The most serious patients are being taken to a hospital.

“Our jails are petri dishes,” said Toni Preckwinkle, president of the Cook County Board of Commissioners, comparing them to nursing homes or cruise ships — both places where the virus has spread rapidly. She said officials were seeking to reduce the jail’s population to 4,000 people, from about 6,000 before the outbreak began. Currently, the population stands at about 5,000. Only inmates accused of nonviolent crimes are eligible for release, she said.

In Cleveland, the legal system was quick to act as the coronavirus took hold in the United States, cutting the county jail population in half, to about 1,000 people, since March 12.

“Otherwise, once this hits, we’d be crippled,” said Brendan J. Sheehan, the administrative and presiding judge of the Cuyahoga County Common Pleas Court. “We would be releasing people immediately because we couldn’t have a quarantine.”

Judge Sheehan led an effort to expedite cases for inmates in the jail awaiting trial. The usual protocols — hearings, plea deals, requests for trials — were kept in place, but proceedings that might have taken 60 or 90 days were resolved within two or three.

“I don’t want people to think that we’re opening up the jail doors and letting people go,” the judge said, adding, “We have to protect the public, and we also have to protect the safety of the inmate.”

In New York City, where the jail system’s chief physician warned several days ago that “a storm is coming,” Mayor Bill de Blasio said the city had released at least 650 people by Sunday from Rikers Island, the city’s main jail complex. Most of those inmates were convicted of nonviolent crimes and serving sentences of less than a year. Hundreds more were under review for possible release.

In Los Angeles County, Sheriff Alex Villanueva has embarked on what appears to be the largest U.S. effort to release inmates, freeing 1,700 people this month, or about 10 percent of the population of one of the nation’s largest jail systems.

“Our population within the jail is a vulnerable population just by virtue of who they are and where they’re located,” he said.

Sheriff Villanueva said the releases had been limited to inmates scheduled to be freed in 30 days or fewer. All had been convicted of nonviolent misdemeanors, he said. So far, there are no confirmed coronavirus cases inside the county’s jails.

Deputies in Los Angeles have also been instructed to make fewer arrests, and Sheriff Villanueva asked the district attorney and courts to delay some criminal proceedings. Arrests in areas patrolled by the Sheriff’s Department have dropped from around 300 a day to about 60 a day.

Jackie Lacey, the Los Angeles County district attorney, said that as a way to remind her prosecutors about the seriousness of the threat to inmates, “I have asked my attorneys to consider the health risks in every decision they make.”

But officials acknowledged that there were concerns about reducing incarceration: About 30 percent of the county’s jail inmates are homeless, and they might be living on the street as soon as they are released, making them at least as vulnerable to the virus as they might be behind bars.

In recent weeks, the city has started to open recreation centers, which were closed to stop the spread of the virus, to homeless people.

“We’re not going to keep them in jail because they don’t have a home,” Sheriff Villanueva said.

California has the second-largest prison population in the country, after Texas, and at least 12 state prison employees there have tested positive for the coronavirus. Staff members and inmates have also tested positive at correctional facilities in Florida, Texas, Michigan, Pennsylvania, New York and Washington State, among others, and advocates said there were almost certainly many undetected cases across the country.

Most inmates in county jails are either serving sentences for minor crimes or are awaiting trial, but state prisons — which hold the majority of the nation’s 2.3 million incarcerated people, most of whom were convicted of felonies — are less likely to make large-scale releases.

For families of incarcerated people, the concern can be agonizing. At other times, Mr. Brewer might worry about his son getting into a fight or running afoul of gangs in the Virginia prison system. But now, he just prays he will not get sick.

Virginia’s Department of Corrections said it had not had any positive tests, and it had halted visits to prisoners as a way of trying to keep the virus out. Many other states, as well as the federal prison system, have also limited or halted visitation.

In New York City, where the Bureau of Prisons said four inmates had tested positive in the city’s two federal jails by Sunday, a lawsuit filed late Friday asked the federal court in Brooklyn to order the immediate release of about 540 federal prisoners there identified as “particularly vulnerable” to the virus because of their age or underlying health conditions.

Katie Rosenfeld, a lawyer for the plaintiffs, said prisoners and their family members were “terrified” that the jail would “very soon be overwhelmed with hundreds of people sick and dying inside.”

Even before the suit was filed, prosecutors in Brooklyn had been directed to review their cases and decide whether releasing inmates would be appropriate, considering their age, health status, the nature of the charges against them and their risk to the community.

Marilyn Mosby, Baltimore’s chief prosecutor, is going through a similar exercise, but has also announced that she will decline to prosecute certain low-level cases, including trespassing, drug possession, prostitution and urinating in public, during the coronavirus outbreak.

“We believe that no longer prosecuting individuals for substance-use disorder or sex work — that’s not going to increase crime,” she said. “The thing that we’re concerned with is public safety, and we don’t want to prescribe someone with substance-use disorder to a death sentence.”

Reporting was contributed by Danielle Ivory, Nicole Hong, Jan Ransom and Alan Feuer.

<|endoftext|>

With parents clamoring to find something — anything — for their kids to do while quarantined, Chris Colin, a freelance journalist in San Francisco, gave his neighbors an assignment. The 44-year-old, who has two kids, put out a call for young reporters and artists to contribute to “Six Feet of Separation, a youth newspaper for Bernal Heights and beyond.”

Colin kicked off the project with an email to about a dozen families, asking for pieces from their children about going to school at home and sheltering in place. He expected to get half of them to play along. But, the original group forwarded his proposition, Colin kept remembering more people he could ask and used social media to get the word out. “I stopped counting at 40,” he said when discussing the number of submissions he’d received.

They are all in the finished product, which includes poems, drawings, reviews, recipes, trivia, horoscopes (!), nature writing and service journalism, with contributors ranging in age from 2 to 19. A piece by Elsie, 2, titled “What I Know About Coronavirus,” is more of an “as told to,” Colin admitted.

Maddy, 9, made MADdy Libs that start with “Many families are stuck at ______ (adj.) home. You may feel ___ (verb), ___ (verb), and ___ (verb).” Ava, 10, recounted a dream about milk sprinklers. Delilah, 14, recommended books for other kids of all ages.

“I really think kids are just as confused by this whole situation as grown-ups are, but they experience it totally differently. These stories sort of reflected that,” Colin said.

Critics reviewed books, including “Wings of Fire” by Tui T. Sutherland and “Big Game” by Stuart Gibbs; TV’s “The Good Place”; the movie “Spies in the Skies”; and food. Ender, 7, gave “tonight’s dinner,” linguini with meat sauce, three out of five stars. Griffin, 14, made a map of all the restaurants still serving food on Bernal’s usually busy Cortland Street.

The project took off, in Colin’s estimation, because “I made it clear that my editorial process is ‘yes’ so that helped people feel like they could do this,” he said. “The main point was to give them something to do, but I wanted to sneak in a little anti-perfectionism.” He also found out kids write much faster than grown-ups.

At 7 and 11 years old, Colin’s kids pitched in with a joint advice column called “Tips for Squabbling.” When people asked if they could send the project to families outside of Bernal, he stuck to his “yes” policy by adding a foreign correspondent section, which may expand in Issue 2, now in the works.

“We pay zero dollars and offer a generous benefits package featuring satisfaction, civic pride and probably some other stuff,” Colin wrote in his call for new submissions. “They’re already pouring in.”

Check out Issue 1 of “Six Feet of Separation” here.

Were it not for the spread of the coronavirus, there would have been a Tuesday morning gathering at the Workers United building on East Avenue in downtown Rochester, N.Y.

The event was organized by members of the Pay Equity Coalition, a local group that unites other organizations around the issue of pay inequity. And it was scheduled to fall on Equal Pay Day, a marker showing how long into 2020 American women would have to work to earn what their male counterparts had already earned by the end of last year.

Government officials and media outlets had been expected to attend. Elementary school students had been invited to share poems and works of art. Organizers had been hoping to promote discussions about how social inequities intersect and overlap, highlighting disparities in terms of gender, age and race.

But a couple weeks ago, it became clear that a gathering like that would not be safe. It had to be canceled.

“Though it is important and vital to have conversations about pay equity, now more than ever we have to be mindful of our current reality,” said Yversha Roman, a Monroe County legislator who is a co-founder of the Pay Equity Coalition.

According to U.S. census data analyzed by the American Association of University Women, median earnings for women were about 82 percent of median earnings for men in 2018. On average, black, Native American and Hispanic women are paid far less than their white counterparts.

In a time of social distancing and spiking unemployment, the issue is more pertinent than ever: Research has shown that the Covid-19 pandemic is likely to have a disproportionately negative effect on women.

But with physical gatherings out of the question for the time being, organizers — for all kinds of causes — will have to find other ways to make their voices heard. The Pay Equity Coalition, for example, is using the internet and social media to promote discussions about pay inequity.

“If anything, I think we will become more creative in our messaging and be able to reach individuals in different walks of life,” Ms. Roman said.

It’s nice to keep busy, if you’re healthy and isolating. Here’s one way! Some pretty serious but easy to follow instructions on how to sew a face mask. And information about how to donate them.

Tomorrow it’s April, and lots of teenagers are still at home with their parents.

Any brisk cruise through TikTok will show off the stresses of teenagers and young adults moving back into their parents’ houses and apartments. (You’ll also see a huge number of couples who now spend their days getting naked while their partners are on conference calls.) But yeah — were you enjoying the second semester at college? Surprise! Thought you’d have some quiet time and making a sewing room out of that messy bedroom? Surrrrprise.

Patrick Wu, a student in Beijing in his senior year, was back at home in January when travel stopped. He’s been home ever since — which is in Anhui province, which is directly inland from Shanghai. And it’s not going great, as we turn the corner into April:

Mr. Wu, in recent weeks, found himself debating politics over the dinner table with the only two people he was allowed to see in person, committing perhaps the prime faux pas of prolonged isolation.

“You can spend 12 hours online talking to your friends every day,” Mr. Wu said. “But you are angry 24 hours every day. So sometimes, your anger just can’t be held back anymore.”

He may be able to go back to Beijing soon, though many young people are deciding if they will return to schools that are remote-only.

For now, many countries in Asia have instituted travel restrictions and screenings that seem severe to American or European standards. There are tracking bracelets, phone location checking, and barring of foreigners, including forcing arrivals into quarantine in government facilities. Around the world, what political change may come from the suddenly evolving world is still very much unknown.

While the leaders of Grand Slam tournaments like Wimbledon and the French Open ponder what to do this year amid the coronavirus pandemic, the leaders of smaller professional tournaments worry whether their events have a future at all.

The disparity within the sport between the elite and hoi polloi is vast. The United States Open, another of the four Grand Slam tournaments, generates gross revenue approaching $400 million annually. Tournaments on the lowest rung of the men’s tour — ATP 250s — routinely generate less than $5 million and, according to Bill Oakes, a former tournament director at the Winston-Salem Open, they make an average profit of only about $125,000.

“The average 250 is one medium-sized sponsor from being in the red,” Oakes said.

Three months of the men’s and women’s season already has been canceled, and the French Open, originally scheduled for late May and early June, has made a unilateral move into other tournaments’ territory from Sept. 20 to Oct. 4.

“I think every tournament needs to be very concerned, about what is going to happen,” Oakes said. “And when the French Open goes and makes a land grab that could impact numerous 250s in the fall that concerns our membership greatly.”

The move has isolated the French Open and could lead to it paying compensation to other events, shifting its date again or being stripped or docked ranking points by the men’s and women’s tours.

If the virus continues to shut down major sports events, the French Open may of course not happen at all in 2020, which would leave French tennis with a major financial shortfall: the event finances the amateur game in the country.

Wimbledon, which has some insurance that would cover it in a pandemic, is debating this week whether to cancel the tournament for the first time since 1945. It is scheduled for June 29 to July 12.

For the last few years, many parents and schools have struggled with screen time for young people. How much time is appropriate for impressionable children to spend with a tablet, a phone or a TV? Answers have ranged from “zero hours” to “all the hours.”

But now … all the schools are screens. And all the homes became schools and day cares. Here’s how one parent of a toddler put it: “I beg her to watch whatever children’s programming PBS is peddling on Amazon Prime.”

But here’s what the parent of an 8- and a 9-year-old found: “My son taught himself iMovie, and now the kids make videos of themselves doing basic things — making Jell-O, shooting hoops — then cut it into pretty professional looking footage. Then they screen share it with their friends on Zoom.” School’s what you make it.

The buses are still running in Devon County in southwestern England. But the seats are mostly empty.

“If you go to Exeter right now, there are maybe six or seven vehicles going down the high street, pumping out diesel, and there is no one on them,” said one bus driver who asked to remain anonymous for fear of retaliation from the transit company. “What is the point of that?”

The driver said the county and bus companies could do more, like making medical tests available to drivers, improving sanitation or adjusting the routes to suit passengers’ needs better.

Over three days last week, the driver said she had only seven passengers. She wiped the seats and railings to protect them, worried that the nightly cleanings at the depots were not nearly enough. One passenger traveling for medical treatment seemed especially nervous, so the driver shared her own hand sanitizer.

“I was just worried about her being on the bus and touching everything, although I’ve cleaned it down,” she said.

But for the most part, the driver was completely alone. She made all the normal stops, driving through the city, past the countryside, down by the coast. She paused at empty stations just to stay on schedule. She stepped out to take photographs of empty streets.

“It’s a zombie bus,” she said.

“It gives you a chance to think about a lot of things,” she added. “There’s nothing open. You can’t get any food anywhere, so you’ve got to pack lunch the night before. You’ve got to have a flask of tea, because there’s nowhere to get tea or anything else.”

During an unrelenting news cycle, CNN is probably the last place you’d turn for a laugh. But when the coronavirus crisis hit New York, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo began regularly appearing on his younger brother Chris’s show, “Cuomo Prime Time,” and a comedy act was born.

First Chris said their father, Mario, the 52nd governor of New York, said that Andrew had “hands like bananas and can’t play ball.” Then, on Monday night, Chris said their mother, Matilda, only trusted him with her sauce recipe. That’s probably true, since Gov. Cuomo acknowledged during a news conference Sunday that he would try to pass off store-bought meatballs as homemade to his children while trying to carry on the family’s Sunday dinner tradition after his divorce.

On Tuesday, however, things turned serious, when Chris announced on Twitter that he had tested positive for the coronavirus and would be isolating himself in his basement, where he will continue to host his show. “He will be fine,” Andrew Cuomo said in Tuesday’s news conference, just minutes after the announcement, adding that Chris’s news was an important reminder for everyone to stay home and keep elderly relatives, like their mother, at a safe distance.

“Sometimes love needs to be a little be smarter,” he said.

It was a stark contrast to just a night earlier, when the brothers traded barbs about Andrew’s “ill-fitting jacket” and Chris’s broadcasting from his basement. “Momma didn’t raise an armchair general in me, anyway, I’m not going to sit in my basement,” Gov. Cuomo said before signing off. “Thanks … Meatball.”

transcript

“You may have just that one patient with the coronavirus that come into your facility, and you don’t know. I can go to work today, wind up feeding them. And then find out two hours later, ‘Oh, they have that virus.’ And I’ve already been exposed. Nursing Assistants, CNA’s, we’re the closest ones, we’re the front line.” The work of nursing assistants has always been difficult and low paying. But add coronavirus, and it’s become dangerous. TV announcers: “Across the country, nursing homes are especially vulnerable —” “One elder care facility, where 19 residents have died —” “In Palo Alto —” “In the New Orleans area —” “In DuPage County —” “In Sacramento County.” “Covid-19 spreading through our most vulnerable population.” We met up with caregivers from nursing homes in Northern California. They attend to the kind of patients who are most likely to die if they get the virus. “So can you do your job without touching people, or without —” “It’s impossible. Everything is touch.” “Bathing. Feeding.” “Assist them to the restroom.” “Brushing their teeth.” “Turning.” “It’s almost like a holding and cleaning at the same time.” “Helping nurses with wound care.” “Cleaning their ears, tying their shoes.” “We do everything.” “Well, you could be feeding that patient or you could be doing something and the patient starts coughing. It’s too late to turn around, you already done got crap all over you. You know, you just run to the bathroom, wash your face or whatever. And then go about your day. Social distance? Can’t do it. It’s impossible.” If this video were filmed at a different time, you’d be seeing footage of these workers with their patients. But nursing homes are closed to visitors right now to protect the people inside. Actually everything you’re seeing here we filmed from afar, following recommendations to slow the spread of Covid-19. But these caregivers can’t maintain that kind of distance in their work. And now, shortages of protective gear like masks are putting them at risk, not just for getting the virus but for spreading it. “If you want to speak, press star 6.” “We’re running out of supplies of masks in our building. And trying to take care of these patients without us also getting sick is worrisome.” “We’re rationing right now, masks, protective gear. But it’s like, what happens if we run out? It scares me.” “They gave us the N95 mask, and told us to maintain it. If the elastic comes off by accident or something, staple and reuse it.” “So you’re actually cleaning the N95 masks in between uses?” “Yeah, with — with alcohol.” “You like wipe off the outside of it or how do you do that?” “The outside, the inside and just let it air dry, and put it back in a Ziploc bag for the next day.” “A lot of people in this field, we have families. So you don’t want to take nothing home. My granddaughter, she’s special needs. So she has a low immune system. When she was born, she was really sick. So we’ve been cautious ever since she’s been born.” “I am very concerned of taking it home. My mom, she’s diabetic, and my dad also just beat cancer in the thyroid. I have asthma. So if I were to get Covid, It would affect my lungs. And how am I going to pay my bills? Because it’s paycheck to paycheck, what I’m doing.” The pay for this work is low: In the U.S., the median salary is less than $30,000 a year. As a result, many nursing assistants work multiple jobs. And as they move between facilities, so can disease. “Usually when I finish the first job, I go right to the second job. I work 16 hours, that’s not including driving time. And I’m not the only one — majority of my co-workers, they work two jobs.” “I work home health care too, on top of taking care of my mom and my grandmother. I’m kind of worried because you don’t see the virus because they’re droplets, and you don’t know who’s coughing or sneezing on you. Even though I do try to sanitize, like along the way, going to my next client. But sometimes it’s just not enough I think. But who else is going to take care of them?”

Social distancing protects us physically, but it can also worsen feelings of isolation and fear. It’s a problem that compounds itself: Many people who need therapy during an especially stressful time can no longer access it in person.

So mental health care professionals have been forced to find new ways to reach their clients. For many, virtual appointments have been a lifeline.

“It’s really important for us as mental health providers to get creative and think outside the box,” said Amanda Fialk, the chief of clinical services for The Dorm, a mental health treatment community for young adults. “Doing that face-to-face individual session, or face-to-face group session, isn’t responsible or safe right now.”

The Dorm serves clients in New York City and Washington D.C., many of whom used to visit the facilities at least five days a week for intensive treatment. Two weeks ago, those services had to be moved online.

“You can get Zoom fatigue sitting in virtual therapy sessions hour after hour,” Dr. Fialk said. “We added in a lot of creative and fun programming for home, because we’re trying to let them know that social distancing doesn’t have to mean social isolation.”

Robyn Suchy, the chapter manager for Active Minds, a nonprofit organization dedicated to metal health awareness for college students, said that talking to his own therapist online in recent weeks has been a little jarring because he was accustomed to having more separation between those sessions and his personal life. Now, everything happens on the same screen.

“It’s been weird to be on this computer that I use for work and then just click into another video meeting for therapy,” he said.

Across the United States, therapists and patients are suddenly grappling with a whole new set of questions: Is telemedicine covered by insurance? Can I still talk to my therapist in California after I move back home to Iowa? Which online chat forums are compliant with patient privacy laws?

“There’s a lot of really interesting and complex conversations happening, but it all kind of comes down to that service delivery, and making sure that people have access to these support networks,” Mr. Suchy said.

He added that it was good to see providers and their patients experimenting with different, more accessible forms of communication that might prove useful even after the threat of coronavirus fades.

Peeping at the flaws and flourishes in others’ living spaces is one of the sustaining pleasures of 21st-century self-isolation.

Can’t go outside? The new Switch video game offers a candy-colored substitute for real life.

Are you feeling squeezed out by your makeshift home school? There are ways to make your space work for the whole family.

Reporting was contributed by Choire Sicha, Farah Miller, Jacey Fortin and Melissa Hoppert.

<|endoftext|>

A chorus of governors from across the political spectrum is publicly challenging the Trump administration’s assertion that the United States is well-stocked and well-prepared to test people for the coronavirus and care for the sickest patients.

In New York State — the center of the nation’s outbreak, with at least 1,550 deaths — Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said on Tuesday that the country’s patchwork approach to the pandemic had made it harder to get desperately needed ventilators.

“You now literally will have a company call you up and say, ‘Well, California just outbid you,’” Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat, said in his daily news briefing. “It’s like being on eBay with 50 other states, bidding on a ventilator.”

Gov. Larry Hogan of Maryland, a Republican, said on Tuesday that his state was “flying blind” in the fight against the coronavirus because officials did not have enough tests. When asked during an NPR interview about President Trump’s comments suggesting that a chronic lack of test kits was no longer a problem in the United States, Mr. Hogan did not mince words: “Yeah, that’s just not true.”

And in Connecticut, Gov. Ned Lamont, a Democrat, said on Tuesday that it was “disturbing” to learn that a national stockpile of medical supplies was running empty.

“We are on our own,” he said.

Across the country, America’s governors are going head-to-head with the Trump administration over the need for testing supplies and ventilators, at times defying party lines. Some have sparred with the president on phone calls and in public interviews. Still others have sided with the president, or calculated that it would be easier to get the needs of their states met with support and praise.

Mr. Trump, who has been quick to pick fights with governors who have criticized his efforts, took aim at Mr. Cuomo on Tuesday, saying that the governor “shouldn’t be complaining.”

“You know what, he has a lot of ventilators,” the president said. “The problem is, with some people, no matter how much you give it’s never enough.”

As the number of coronavirus cases has exploded in the United States, threatening to overwhelm the country’s hospital system, governors have become key figures in the public fight against the virus. This week, two governors — Mr. Hogan, the Republican from Maryland, and Gov. Gretchen Whitmer of Michigan, a Democrat — teamed up to write a bipartisan op-ed, calling on the federal government to send tests, track ventilator shortages and buoy state budgets.

“The coronavirus doesn’t distinguish between red states and blue states,” they wrote in the joint piece, which appeared in The Washington Post, “and neither can we.”

In recent weeks, the president has launched broadsides against Democratic governors who accused him and his administration of failing to adequately supply states with needed medical equipment, while claiming that the federal government has “done a job the likes of which nobody’s seen” in delivering needed supplies quickly.

The White House has held more than 90 briefings with state, local and tribal leaders since January, according to data from the Trump administration. In addition to doling out federal supplies to states, Mr. Trump has also invoked the Defense Production Act to spur the private sector to make ventilators, despite resisting pressure from state governors and Democrats to use the law to accelerate the production of supplies in the days after its signing.

“President Trump has taken an unprecedented approach to communicating and working with our nation’s governors,” Judd Deere, a White House spokesman, said in a statement when asked about the criticism of Mr. Hogan and others on Tuesday night. “During these difficult times, Americans are receiving comfort, hope and resources from their president, as well as their local officials, because this is an all-of-American effort.”

But governors across the country, from South Dakota to New York, have for weeks pleaded with the administration to produce supplies they say have not arrived. During a teleconference with several governors earlier in March, Mr. Trump heard from several governors who said they were still waiting for masks and ventilators, despite repeated claims from White House coronavirus task force officials that the equipment was on the way.

“The country has really stepped up like I don’t think we’ve seen it in many, many — probably decades,” Mr. Trump told the governors during the call held on March 19. “It’s incredible the way they’ve stepped up. So we hope we can get rid of this thing quickly.”

The president’s tone has changed rapidly as several governors who were concerned about supplies on that call have started to speak out publicly.

At a news briefing with reporters on Friday, Mr. Trump said that Ms. Whitmer, who has been a vocal critic of his administration’s coronavirus response, “has no idea what’s going on,” adding, “All she does is say, ‘Oh, it’s the federal government’s fault.’”

At different points, Mr. Trump has directed Vice President Mike Pence to stop calling Ms. Whitmer and Gov. Jay Inslee of Washington, a Democrat who has also criticized the administration’s response.

“I want them to be appreciative,” the president said. “We’ve done a great job.”

On Tuesday, officials in Michigan said the state had received three shipments of supplies from the federal government, including about 1 million masks and hundreds of thousands of gloves, allocated by population size. They said they had also requested additional supplies from the federal government: Of thousands of ventilators requested, they had received about 400.

All of the supplies sent to Michigan had been working and usable, a state representative said. In California, officials said 170 ventilators sent to Los Angeles had been unusable and were sent to a Silicon Valley company for repair.

Confused by the terms about coronavirus testing? Let us help:

Mr. Trump struck a cooperative tone at the White House in a news conference on Tuesday as he detailed his calls with governors to a group of reporters. He said that he had spoken to Ms. Whitmer and that a field hospital with 250 beds would be established in Michigan.

The need for more supplies has become a central issue as the coronavirus has spread, foretelling months of crisis. One model, created by scientists at the University of Washington’s Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, predicts that deaths from the virus in the United States will rise rapidly during the month of April, from about 4,000 to almost 60,000, even with the many restrictions on movement now in place. The study suggests that the pace of deaths will eventually slow down, reaching a total of about 84,000 by the beginning of August.

Mr. Trump recently extended federal social distancing guidelines at least through the end of April.

White House officials have struggled with the idea of federal mandates, preferring to take a traditionally conservative small-government approach to the crisis. Officials have at times discussed the idea of a national curfew or similarly stringent measures — only to have those dismissed by higher-ranking players.

That has left governors to make their own decisions about whether to take the significant step of ordering residents to stay home, creating a split across the United States, with more than 30 states issuing some type of statewide stay-at-home instruction.

Gov. Ron DeSantis of Florida, who has been criticized for refusing to set more statewide mandates as the number of confirmed cases of the coronavirus there has soared over 6,700, said on Tuesday that one reason he had not was because the White House’s task force had not recommended it.

“If they do, that’s something that would carry a lot of weight with me,” said Mr. DeSantis, a Republican who has been conciliatory to the White House and received praise in return.

“He’s been doing a great job in every respect,” Mr. Trump said of Mr. DeSantis, whom he speaks with regularly and who has been aggressive in his requests to the government to supply masks and ventilators to his state.

Mr. Trump also has an ally in Gov. Greg Abbott of Texas, who has not issued a statewide stay-at-home order and who spoke positively of the federal response on Tuesday. Mr. Abbott said that governors in the United States have conference calls once or twice a week with federal officials, including the president, the vice president and Dr. Deborah L. Birx, the lead coordinator of the White House’s coronavirus task force. “They are constantly — they at the federal level — are constantly working on increasing supplies,” he said. “We are anticipating far greater supplies coming forward.”

But other governors who have taken an aggressive approach were adamant that more supplies were needed.

Gov. Mike DeWine of Ohio, a Republican, said on CNN on Tuesday that it was difficult to project when cases would peak in his state, in part because there were not enough tests. “That is not unique to Ohio,” he said. “We have seen that throughout the country. That’s been a real challenge.” The Ohio health department on Tuesday said that it had received thousands of gowns, masks and gloves from the federal government, but that even combined with what the state has on hand, the stockpile would not be enough to protect health care workers and emergency medical workers.

Mr. Cuomo, at the center of the crisis in New York, has taken to appealing directly to Mr. Trump and key federal agencies, such as the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Department of Health and Human Services.

“Time to say to that federal government and to FEMA and H.H.S.: You have to learn how to do your job,” he said. “And you have to learn how to do it quickly.”

Reporting was contributed by Manny Fernandez, Patricia Mazzei, Ed Shanahan, Adeel Hassan, Thomas Fuller and Michael Gold.

<|endoftext|>

Good morning and welcome to On Politics, a daily political analysis of the 2020 elections based on reporting by New York Times journalists.

Sign up here to get On Politics in your inbox every weekday.

In a call with President Trump yesterday, governors raised concerns about the limited availability of coronavirus test kits. But he wasn’t particularly receptive. When Steve Bullock, the governor of Montana and a Democratic candidate for the Senate, told Trump that his state was on the verge of running out of tests, Trump replied that he had not “heard about testing being a problem.” The New York Times and other news outlets have repeatedly confirmed that many worried Americans who have symptoms of the virus are struggling to get tested. Trump has recently taken to highlighting the fact that the United States has tested more people than any other country — though it does not have nearly the highest testing rate per capita.

There’s something of a Democratic beauty contest playing out between Joe Biden and Gov. Andrew Cuomo of New York, in spite of the apparent wishes of the guys involved. And Trump would love to keep it going. In an interview with Fox News, he seemed to be goading Cuomo into an improbable last-minute challenge to Biden for the presidential nomination. “If he’s going to run, that’s fine, I’ve known Andrew for a long time,” Trump said. “I think he’d be a better candidate than Sleepy Joe.” With the presidential race overshadowed by coronavirus coverage, the idea that Cuomo might take on Biden has become the closest that many people’s minds get these days to thinking about the nomination fight. 

Indeed, in his daily remarks to reporters on Monday, Cuomo seemed to turn his attention from New York to the country at large. “You see this virus move across the state, you see the virus move across this nation,” he said. “There is no American who is immune to this virus. I don’t care if you live in Kansas, I don’t care if you live in Texas.” Biden’s few recent television appearances, meanwhile, have earned mixed reviews. He has often cut himself off or offered confusing statements, as Fox News has zealously reported.

In addition to endangering health professionals, the coronavirus and its effects are falling especially hard on the poorest Americans, particularly those in cities. In neighborhoods where many health care and service industry workers live, the obligatory use of public transportation puts a disproportionate number at risk: A Times analysis found that while public transit use has fallen drastically in hard-hit New York City, it has tended to remain at higher levels in some of the least wealthy areas, with heavy concentrations of nonwhite residents.

President Trump inspected a coronavirus testing kit during Monday’s briefing at the White House. 

Lots of us have plenty of time to be on the phone these days. Biden — who’s holed up in Delaware — is no exception. And, as Shane Goldmacher reports in a just-published article, Biden “is working the phones with top donors while cloistered” at home.

He’s seeking to make up ground after a grueling primary season in which he failed to match the fund-raising levels of most major rivals. And Trump, who’s waiting for him in the general election, has vastly more cash on hand than Biden.

We spoke to Shane about the difficulties of asking people for contributions during a pandemic, and how Biden’s fund-raising team is trying to meet the moment.

Take us back to early to mid-March: Where was the Biden campaign, just before the coronavirus ground everything to a halt? Unless I’m mistaken, Biden had a lot of momentum but he did not exactly have the most impressive fund-raising operation of 2020. Did he think he was on the cusp of a financial breakthrough before the virus hit?

You’re definitely not mistaken. Biden struggled relative to his top rivals to raise money in 2019 and early 2020. “I had virtually no money,” he joked at the last debate. But his financial fortunes turned around drastically after he won South Carolina. He raised $5 million in a day. And then after Super Tuesday, the pace accelerated to the point where he raised $33 million in the first half of March, more than he had raised in any previous full month.

What does the average day look like right now for Biden? You mention in your article that he’s doing a lot of fund-raising calls, and we haven’t been seeing him on TV nearly as much as Trump or even, say, Cuomo. Would you say calls to donors are his highest priority now?

The Biden campaign has been mum on his fund-raising since March 15, but donations to all Democrats on ActBlue have really slowed in the past two weeks, as I report in today’s article. And while Biden has not been on TV as much as Trump, his campaign did recently install a studio in his home and he has regularly made news media appearances: an MSNBC hit on Monday, “Meet the Press” on Sunday, a CNN virtual town hall last week. He has been calling donors, too. I wouldn’t say that’s his highest priority, but his status as the prohibitive favorite to be the Democratic nominee means all the donors to his old rivals are now available to him.

It’s got to be a tough time to call someone — even a wealthy person — and ask for money. Are people still making these calls?

Some are. Some aren’t. I spoke with multiple fund-raisers who said they had other priorities now, whether philanthropic or personal or their own businesses. But others said that what they saw as Trump’s catastrophic mishandling of the coronavirus outbreak had made the need to remove him even clearer, and that money was still flowing in.

You point out in the article that Trump’s campaign and the Republican National Committee are sitting on about 10 times as much cash as Biden and the Democrats. How did the G.O.P. gain such a big advantage this year? And a follow-up: Do Trump’s fund-raising tactics seem better positioned than Biden’s to bear results in a quarantine?

The short answer is time. Trump started stashing away money for his re-election in 2017, and he and the party have taken advantage of rules that let him raise funds in far bigger chunks with shared committees with the Republican National Committee. Biden, who’s not yet the Democratic nominee, does not have such a joint committee. It’s hard to say who is better positioned going forward — there has never been a simultaneous pandemic and an economic downturn in modern times — but Trump no doubt begins with a huge financial head start.



On Politics is also available as a newsletter. Sign up here to get it delivered to your inbox.

Is there anything you think we’re missing? Anything you want to see more of? We’d love to hear from you. Email us at onpolitics@nytimes.com.

<|endoftext|>

“Love each other,” someone recently wrote in pink chalk on a Manhattan sidewalk.

It’s a simple command. But even the smallest gesture, like offering a hug or watching someone’s child, now carries health risks as communities struggle to contain the spread of the coronavirus.

But people are finding a way.

An army of sewers across the country has banded together to make desperately needed masks for hospital workers. In rural Oregon, bus drivers are delivering lunches in brown paper bags to children in need. Landlords are reducing rent. College students are fetching groceries for older neighbors or those with compromised immune systems — and wiping them down with bleach before depositing them on a doorstep. People are rescuing cats and dogs from shelters.

To make it through overwhelming and uncertain times, experts say it’s critical for people to remember there are glimmers of hope and goodness.

Many thanks to the dozens of people who shared stories of kindness and generosity with us.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — Five weeks ago, when there were 60 confirmed cases of the coronavirus in the United States, President Trump expressed little alarm. “This is a flu,” he said. “This is like a flu.” He was still likening it to an ordinary flu as late as Friday.

By Tuesday, however, with more than 187,000 recorded cases in the United States and more Americans having been killed by the virus than by the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, the president’s assessment had rather drastically changed. “It’s not the flu,” he said. “It’s vicious.”

The grim-faced president who appeared in the White House briefing room for more than two hours on Tuesday evening beside charts showing death projections of hellacious proportions was coming to grips with a reality he had long refused to accept. At a minimum, the charts predicted that 100,000 to 240,000 Americans would die — and only if the nation abided by stringent social restrictions that would choke the economy and impoverish millions.

A crisis that Mr. Trump had repeatedly asserted was “under control” and hoped would “miraculously” disappear has come to consume his presidency, presenting him with a challenge that he seems only now to be seeing more clearly.

The staggering numbers publicly outlined on Tuesday had forced him over the weekend to reverse his plan to reopen the country by Easter, but they were hardly new or surprising. Experts have been warning of a possibility like this for weeks. But more than ever before, Mr. Trump seemed to acknowledge them.

“I want every American to be prepared for the hard days that lie ahead,” the president said, the starkest such effort he has made to prepare the country for the expected wave of disease and death. “We’re going to go through a very tough two weeks.”

Afterward, he added: “We’re going to start seeing some real light at the end of the tunnel. But this is going to be a very painful — very, very painful — two weeks.”

Under the best-case scenario presented on Tuesday, Mr. Trump will see more Americans die from the coronavirus in the weeks and months to come than Presidents Harry S. Truman, Dwight D. Eisenhower, John F. Kennedy, Lyndon B. Johnson and Richard M. Nixon saw die in the Korean and Vietnam Wars combined.

The lowest estimate would claim nearly as many Americans as World War I under President Woodrow Wilson and 14 times as many Americans as Iraq and Afghanistan together under Presidents George W. Bush and Barack Obama.

That is a daunting realization for any president, one that left Mr. Trump now anticipating “the worst thing that the country has probably ever seen.”

A pandemic is not a war, of course. Mr. Trump did not choose to have a pandemic. But he will be judged on how he responded, and the reviews from many quarters have been scalding even as polls have shown rising public support. While he has framed himself as a wartime president and on Tuesday conceded the bleak picture more fully than ever before, he continued to rewrite the history of his handling of it.

Despite comparing it to the ordinary flu and saying for weeks that it would pass, the president insisted on Tuesday that he understood all along that it could be a killer of historic proportions. “I thought it could be,” he said. “I knew everything. I knew it could be horrible, and I knew it could be maybe good.”

Mr. Trump said he played down the seriousness of the threat because he chose to be reassuring. “I want to give people hope,” he said. “You know, I’m a cheerleader for the country.”

He said longtime business associates were advising him not to react aggressively to the virus, presumably out of concern for what it could mean for the economy, which now faces certain recession.

“I’ve had many friends, businesspeople, people with great actually common sense — they said, ‘Why don’t we ride it out?’” Mr. Trump said without identifying them. “A lot of people have said, a lot of people have thought about it, ride it out, don’t do anything, just ride it out and think of it as the flu. But it’s not the flu. It’s vicious.”

Despite the criticism, the president denied that he himself had been riding it out, pointing again, as he often does, to his decision at the end of January to limit travel from China, where the first major outbreak occurred, a move that came as airlines were already cutting back flights on their own. Experts like Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, have credited that decision with slowing the spread of the virus to the United States.

But Mr. Trump cites it as if it were the only action that was necessary when specialists have said the benefit of the travel restrictions was diminished because the United States did not use the time that it bought to ramp up testing fast enough.

The president did not explain on Tuesday why testing was so slow, nor did he explain why he waited to recommend canceling large events, closing businesses and schools and limiting group gatherings until after governors began ordering it themselves. Nor did he explain why he publicly declared that the country could reopen as early as Easter, only to reverse himself days later, if he understood all along how bad the situation could get.

At the White House briefing on Tuesday, Dr. Fauci was asked whether the death toll could have been kept below the minimum 100,000 now forecast if social distancing guidelines had been put in place earlier. He said it depended on whether the virus had already arrived in the United States and spread further than was known early on.

“If there was virus there that we didn’t know about, then the answer to your question is probably yes,” he said. “Now, the only trouble with that is that whenever you come out and say something like that, it always becomes almost a sound bite that gets taken out of context.” Dr. Fauci added, “If there was virtually nothing there, then there’s nothing to mitigate.”

All of which is why public health experts have said that early widespread testing would have been so critical. “In a perfect world, it would’ve been nice to know what was going on there,” Dr. Fauci told Jim Acosta of CNN, referring to the earliest outbreaks in Asia. “We didn’t, but I believe, Jim, that we acted very, very early in that.”

Mr. Trump asserted that had he not blocked most travelers from China, the United States would have reached closer to the maximum projected death toll of up to 2.2 million. “When you look at it could have been 2.2 million people died and more if we did nothing, if we just did nothing,” he said, then he and the country “have done a great job.” In effect, he seemed to be setting up the argument that any death toll below that will be a validation of his handling of the crisis.

Whatever the eventual number will be, the pandemic of 2020 seems likely to rank with the deadliest of the past century. The worst came in 1918-20 and killed about 675,000 Americans, accounting for many of the military deaths attributed to World War I. Another pandemic in 1957-58 killed about 116,000 in the United States, and one in 1968 killed about 100,000. The H1N1 virus in 2009, for which Mr. Trump has assailed Mr. Obama’s response, killed only 12,000. The ordinary flu has resulted in 12,000 to 61,000 deaths annually since 2010.

Mr. Trump and his administration have stepped up efforts in recent weeks, expanding testing and seeking to work with governors to address shortages of ventilators, masks and other medical equipment. The president has dispatched medical ships and Army engineers to help, moved to force General Motors to manufacture more ventilators and, after flirting with an early reopening, extended social distancing guidelines until the end of April. Governors have both welcomed the help and complained that it is still inadequate.

For much of Tuesday’s marathon two-hour and 11-minute briefing, the longest single public appearance of his presidency, according to Factba.se, which monitors his activities, Mr. Trump took on a more somber approach as the scale of the fatalities seemed to sink in.

He jousted to some degree with Mr. Acosta and Yamiche Alcindor of “PBS NewsHour,” two of his favorite foils, but he was more restrained with them than usual and avoided some of the more incendiary language he often uses.

Yet he could not resist forever. By the time the briefing ended, he had lapsed back into complaints about the impeachment “hoax” and renewed his attacks on critics like James B. Comey, the former F.B.I. director, and Mr. Comey’s onetime deputy, Andrew G. McCabe, while congratulating himself for his performance. “Did it divert my attention?” the president asked of the impeachment. “I think I’m getting A-pluses for the way I handled myself during a phony impeachment.”

Still, Mr. Trump, rarely a reflective person in public, mused about the human toll of the pandemic more than he did in the early weeks of the crisis apparently because it has hit his own circle. As he has in the past couple of days, he referred to an overwhelmed hospital in his childhood home of Queens and an unidentified friend he said had been hospitalized with the virus.

“When you send a friend to the hospital and you call up to find out how is he doing,” Mr. Trump said, “it happened to me where goes to the hospital, he says goodbye, sort of a tough guy, a little older, a little heavier than he’d like to be frankly and you call up the next day, how is he doing? And he’s in a coma. This is not the flu.”

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — President Trump told governors on a conference call on Monday that he had not “heard about testing in weeks,” suggesting that a chronic lack of kits to screen people for the coronavirus was no longer a problem.

But governors painted a different picture on the ground.

Gov. Steve Bullock of Montana, a Democrat, said that officials in his state were trying to do “contact tracing” — tracking down people who have come into contact with those who have tested positive — but that they were struggling because “we don’t have adequate tests,” according to an audio recording of the conversation obtained by The New York Times.

“Literally we are one day away, if we don’t get test kits from the C.D.C., that we wouldn’t be able to do testing in Montana,” Mr. Bullock said.

The midday call was one of a handful that Mr. Trump has held with governors, some of whom have sparred with the president over the federal government’s response to the spread of the coronavirus. Others have calculated that it will be easier to get the needs of their states fulfilled by praising Mr. Trump, who seeks credit and affirmation in most interactions.

On the Monday call, Mr. Bullock — whose state is heavily rural — tried to stress the disparity Montana faces in trying to mitigate the spread of the virus because of the lack of testing.

transcript

“Literally, we are one day away if we don’t get test kits from the C.D.C. Then we wouldn’t be able to be tested in Montana. We have gone, time and time again, to the private side of this. The private market, in where the private market is telling us that it’s a national resource that are then taking our orders apart. Basically, we’re getting our orders canceled. And that’s for PPE. That’s for testing supplies. That’s for testing equipment. So, while we’re trying to do all the contact tracing, we don’t have adequate tests to necessarily do it. We don’t have the [inaudible] along the way, and we’re not finding markets to be able to do that. Along the way are private suppliers. So we do have to rely on a national chain of distribution or we’re not going to get it. But we are doing our best to try to do exactly that. Like, Gallatin County would be an example where we have almost half of our overall state’s — those are the positives. We’re trying to shift the supply to really isolate that and do the contact tracing, but we just don’t have enough supplies to even do the testing.” “Right. Tony, uh, you can answer it if you want, but I haven’t heard about testing in weeks. We’ve tested more now than any nation in the world. We’ve got these great tests, and we come out with another one tomorrow where, you know, it’s almost instantaneous testing. But I haven’t heard about testing being a problem.”

Mr. Trump initially said that Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, could respond to the question, but then quickly offered a rejoinder. “I haven’t heard about testing in weeks,” the president said. “We’ve tested more now than any nation in the world. We’ve got these great tests and we’re coming out with a faster one this week.” Reiterating his point, Mr. Trump added, “I haven’t heard about testing being a problem.”

Many people who have symptoms of the virus are still finding it difficult to be tested, and many who have been tested are waiting more than a week to get results. The failures of the federal government to adequately develop testing supplies for the contagion have been well documented by The New York Times and other news outlets, reports that have rankled Mr. Trump.

Although testing has picked up since a series of setbacks left the United States behind, governors have continued to warn in recent days that their response is still hampered by shortages, including of basic supplies like swabs. Gov. Jay Inslee of Washington, a Democrat, told CNN on Sunday that “we have a desperate need for the testing kits.” And Gov. Ralph Northam of Virginia, also a Democrat, warned last week that there was a shortage of testing materials in his state.

The president has recently taken to pointing to the volume of tests that have been administered — a misleading figure because, according to health experts, the more relevant figure is how many people are being tested per capita. In that regard, the United States still lags well behind other nations like South Korea.

Other governors also made it clear to Mr. Trump that they needed more supplies, if somewhat more delicately. Gov. Roy Cooper of North Carolina, a Democrat, told Mr. Trump: “As much as you can send us is very much appreciated.”

That prompted the president to note that “we have a lot of planes coming in” and that “Boeing gave us their big, monster cargo plane; it’s the biggest cargo plane in the world.”

At another point in the call, when someone asked if the governor of Utah was on the line, Mr. Trump cracked that he was probably visiting Mitt Romney, the state’s junior senator who has been in quarantine after coming into contact with Senator Rand Paul, Republican of Kentucky, who tested positive for the coronavirus.

Confused by the terms about coronavirus testing? Let us help:

A White House spokesman, Hogan Gidley, described the call this way: “The governors praised President Trump’s leadership, assistance and quick action to address this national crisis, and the president told the governors he would make sure that whatever they may need, he would direct his team to provide.”

And at the daily White House briefing on Monday afternoon, Mr. Trump described the call as an opportunity for the governors to thank his administration.

“I think for the most part, they were saying, Thank you for doing a great job,” he said.

Meanwhile, Mr. Inslee said on Monday that he was shocked to hear the president convey a lack of awareness about testing concerns and that he was hopeful the president would look into the issue.

“It would be shocking to me that if anyone who has had access to any newspaper, radio, social networks or any other communication would not be knowledgeable about the need for test kits,” Mr. Inslee said. “I can be assured that the White House knows very well about this desperate need for test kits.”

Mr. Inslee said his state was facing a “dire” shortage of kits, leaving a choke point in an effort to ramp up testing. He described how, in one case, workers at the state’s Health Department had to drive hours across Washington to pick up kits and bring them to the city of Yakima to help test during an outbreak there.

The state is looking everywhere it can to find test kits, Mr. Inslee said, but he would like to see the federal government order businesses around the country to manufacture them to help states get the supplies they need.

“This could really use federal leadership to get this job done,” Mr. Inslee said.

While Washington has conducted tens of thousands of tests thus far, perhaps the most per capita behind New York, Mr. Inslee said officials needed much more to help guide decisions and containment strategies.

Jonathan Martin reported from Washington, Maggie Haberman from New York and Mike Baker from Seattle.

<|endoftext|>

On Feb. 27, two days after the first reported case of the coronavirus spreading inside a community in the United States, Candace Owens was underwhelmed. “Now we’re all going to die from Coronavirus,” she wrote sarcastically to her two million Twitter followers, blaming a “doomsday cult” of liberal paranoia for the growing anxiety over the outbreak.

One month later, on the day the United States reached the grim milestone of having more documented coronavirus cases than anywhere in the world, Ms. Owens — a conservative commentator whom President Trump has called “a real star” — was back at it, offering what she said was “a little perspective” on the 1,000 American deaths so far. “The 2009 swine flu infected 1.4 Billion people around the world, and killed 575,000 people,” she wrote. “There was no media panic, and societies did not shut down.”

In the weeks leading up to the escalation of the coronavirus pandemic in the United States, tens of millions of Americans who get their information from media personalities like Ms. Owens heard that this once-in-a-lifetime global health crisis was actually downright ordinary.

The president’s backers sometimes seemed to take their cues from him. On Feb. 26, the day before Ms. Owens was a guest at the White House for an African-American History Month reception, Mr. Trump denied it would spread further. “I don’t think it’s inevitable,” he said.

At other times, the president echoed right-wing media stars. When he declared at a campaign rally two days later that criticism of his halting response was a “new hoax,” commentators like Laura Ingraham of Fox News had already been accusing his opponents of exploiting the crisis. “A coronavirus,” she said on Feb. 25, “that’s a new pathway for hitting President Trump.” And when he falsely asserted that he had treated the outbreak as a pandemic all along, Fox hosts like Sean Hannity backed him up, saying that Mr. Trump’s decision to restrict travel from China and Europe would “go down as the single most consequential decision in history.” 

A review of hundreds of hours of programming and social media traffic from Jan. 1 through mid-March — when the White House started urging people to stay home and limit their exposure to others — shows that doubt, cynicism and misinformation about the virus took root among many of Mr. Trump’s boosters in the right-wing media as the number of confirmed cases in the United States grew.

It was during this lull — before the human and economic toll became undeniable — when the story of the coronavirus among the president’s most stalwart defenders evolved into the kind of us-versus-them clash that Mr. Trump has waged for much of his life.

Now, with the nation’s economic and physical health in clear peril, Mr. Trump and many of his allies on the airwaves and online are blaming familiar enemies in the Democratic Party and the news media.

transcript

“Have you been briefed by the C.D.C.?” “I have.” “Are there worries about a pandemic at this point?” “No, we’re not at all, and we have it totally under control. It’s one person coming in from China, and we have it under control. It’s going to be just fine. I’ve always known this is a real — this is a pandemic. I felt it was a pandemic long before it was called a pandemic. Now the Democrats are politicizing the coronavirus. We did one of the great jobs. You say, ‘How’s President Trump doing?’ They go, ‘Oh, not good, not good.’ They have no clue. They don’t have any clue. And this is their new hoax. I’ve always viewed it as very serious. There was no difference yesterday from days before. I feel the tone is similar, but some people said it wasn’t. We’re — what do you have, a very small number of people in the country right now with it? It’s like around 12. Many of them are getting better. Some are fully recovered already. So we’re in very good shape. We’re going to be pretty soon at only five people. And we could be at just one or two people over the next short period of time. So you’re talking about 2.2 million deaths — 2.2 million people from this. And so if we could hold that down, as we’re saying, to 100,000 — it’s a horrible number, maybe even less, but to 100,000, so we have between 100,000 and 200,000. We all together have done a very good job. The flu in our country kills from 25,000 people to 69,000 people a year. That was shocking to me. But that’s a little bit like the flu. It’s a little like the regular flu that we have flu shots for. And we’ll essentially have a flu shot for this in a fairly quick manner. View this the same as the flu. This is not the flu. It’s vicious. It is so contagious. Flu has never been like that, and there is — flu is contagious, but nothing like we’ve ever seen here. Anybody that wants a test can get a test. That’s what — the bottom line. Anybody right now and yesterday, anybody that needs a test gets a test. They’re there. They have the tests. And the tests are beautiful. And in some cases, they’re in California where we have too many. And then in other cases, the distribution could be a little bit better for certain areas, but we’ve done a good job on testing.”

The pervasiveness of the denial among many of Mr. Trump’s followers from early in the outbreak, and their sharp pivot to finding fault with an old foe once the crisis deepened, is a pattern that one expert in the spread of misinformation said resembled a textbook propaganda campaign.

Yochai Benkler, a professor at Harvard Law School and co-author of a book on political manipulation called “Network Propaganda,” said that as the magnitude of the virus’s effects grew and the coverage on the right shifted, Mr. Trump’s loyalists benefited from having told people not to believe what they were hearing. “The same media that’s been producing this intentional ignorance is saying what they’ve always been saying: ‘We’re right. They’re wrong,’” he said. “But it also permits them to turn on a dime.”

“We can look at that and get whiplashed,” he added. “But from the inside it doesn’t look like whiplash.”

In January and early February, when the virus ravaged China and doubts grew about how forthcoming Chinese officials were being, some pundits on the right warned that the country couldn’t be trusted to contain the outbreak or share accurate information about where it originated.

Starting in late January, Tucker Carlson’s prime-time Fox News show became an early outlier in conservative media, sounding the alarm about a “mysterious” sickness spreading in Wuhan, China, that had killed about two dozen people. According to Mr. Carlson, speaking on Jan. 23, it was “believed to have jumped from bats and snakes — which are commonly eaten in this part of China — to people.”

Fox News became a launching pad for the idea of halting travel from China, which guests like Senator Tom Cotton, Republican of Arkansas, urged while also at times suggesting that the virus had been created in a Chinese government laboratory not far from the epicenter of the outbreak. On Jan. 31, the Trump administration said it would bar entry by most foreign citizens who had recently visited China.

Some of Mr. Carlson’s Fox colleagues were less convinced of the threat. “Do I look nervous? No. I’m not afraid of this coronavirus at all,” Jesse Watters, a co-host of “The Five,” said on Jan. 30 as he teased another host for “shaking in his shoes.”

Fox News declined to comment.

In the weeks that followed, thousands would die from the virus around the world, thousands more would be sickened across Europe and the first cases would emerge in the United States. But the tone of the coverage from Fox, talk radio and the commentators who make up the president’s zealous online army remained dismissive.

Talk show hosts and prominent right-wing writers criticized other conservatives who took the threat seriously. “Drudge has a screaming headline,” Rush Limbaugh announced on Feb. 26, referring to Matt Drudge and his website. “Flight attendant working L.A.X. tests positive. Oh, my God, 58 cases! Oh, my God. Oh, my God.” For years, Mr. Limbaugh has encouraged his audience to be suspicious of science as one of his so-called Four Corners of Deceit, which also include government, academia and media.

On Feb. 27, Mr. Hannity opened his show in a rage. “The apocalypse is imminent and you’re going to all die, all of you in the next 48 hours. And it’s all President Trump’s fault,” he said, adding, “Or at least that’s what the media mob and the Democratic extreme radical socialist party would like you to think.” His program would be one of many platforms with large audiences of conservatives — 5.6 million people watched Mr. Hannity interview the president on Fox last week — to misleadingly highlight statistics on deaths from the seasonal flu as a comparison.

On Feb. 28, Mr. Limbaugh read from an article from The Western Journal, a website that was blacklisted by Apple News last year for promoting articles Apple determined were “overwhelmingly rejected by the scientific community.” The coronavirus, Mr. Limbaugh said, “appears far less deadly” than the flu, but the government and the media “keep promoting panic.”

Joel Pollak, an editor at Breitbart News whose work on the virus has been cited by Mr. Hannity, published several articles in February and early March that highlighted the least severe symptoms and best possible outcomes. On Feb. 28, he urged people to “chill out.”

The first of more than 4,500 American deaths to date would occur the next day. Two days later, Mr. Pollak wrote another article criticizing a doctor from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention who warned that the coronavirus was likely to spread. The doctor was the sister of Rod Rosenstein, the former deputy attorney general, he noted, “who was once suspected of trying to help remove the president from office.” He assured his readers that he saw “no conspiracy” — only “the ordinary problem of scientists not being very good at communicating to the public.”

Mr. Pollak, whose articles were breezier in tone than much of the coverage elsewhere on Breitbart, declined to comment.

Faced with the inescapable fact that the virus was killing people, many conservatives started sounding fatalistic. Yes it’s deadly, they acknowledged, but so are a lot of other things. “How many people have died this year in the United States from snake bites?” the conservative radio host Dennis Prager asked in an online “fireside chat” posted March 12 to his website, PragerU, where it has been viewed more than 600,000 times. 

On March 10, the day that Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, warned every American to adopt an “all hands on deck” mind-set, Ms. Owens scoffed at what she called “the mass global mental breakdown” as financial markets plunged. “People think it’s novel that 80 year olds are dying at a high rate from a flu,” she wrote, adding that when future generations study the world’s coronavirus response, “This tweet will age well.”

Ms. Owens is the kind of influential conservative — she has a huge online audience as well as sway with the White House and top cable news and radio producers — who has been central to spreading doubt about the seriousness of the virus to Mr. Trump’s most loyal supporters. 

In an interview, Ms. Owens said she did not believe that her tweets were irresponsible. “Do I think it’s irresponsible to say the economic impact will be the legacy?” she said. “It’s not about being responsible. It’s about being honest.”

After playing down the risks, some broadcasters turned to coronavirus survivor stories.

On March 13th, “Fox & Friends” ran a segment featuring a 65-year-old woman who said she caught the virus and barely had any symptoms. During the interview, the host Steve Doocy asked about the “absolute panic” and noted the concern about older people in particular. “Well look at that,” he said to the woman. “But you are over 60, and it doesn’t seem to have been a big deal to you, right?” Mr. Doocy said.

The interview was picked up that afternoon by Mr. Limbaugh, where its reach grew considerably given his 15.5 million listeners each week. Earlier that week, when a caller said that he and his wife believed they might have been infected before the virus was known to be widespread, Mr. Limbaugh dismissed him. “Let me ask you a question,” the host said. “Did you two die, and you are speaking to me from beyond the grave?”

On social media, people often responded with ridicule. They called the virus a “bad cold” and circulated memes of a red T-shirt that said “I survived Coronavirus 2020.”

By the middle of March, the story of the virus on the right was one of how Mr. Trump’s enemies had weaponized “the flu” and preyed on the insecurities of an emasculated America.

Mr. Limbaugh blamed “wimp politics — which is liberalism.” Mr. Pollak, whose tone grew more serious, said the virus had spread while Democrats stretched out the president’s impeachment. “We now know the cost of impeachment,” he wrote.

Frank Luntz, the veteran political strategist who advises Republican leaders, said many on the right were applying the scornful, “own the libs” mentality of social media to a deadly and frightening health crisis.

Mr. Trump has also cast himself as a victim. “It’s so unfair. It’s so unfair,” he said last week to Mr. Hannity on Fox News. “If we could only have a fair media in this country, our country.”

Mr. Hannity and his fans may see criticism of the president as a histrionic meltdown of an anti-Trump mob, but the broadcaster has dialed back some denial. Elsewhere at Fox, Trish Regan, a Fox Business host, left the network after expressing doubt about the severity of the situation.

The criticism seemed to catch Mr. Hannity and other pro-Trump personalities at Fox off guard, according to people who work at the network, if only because they did not believe that their remarks on the coronavirus were any different from how they have defended the president as the victim of an orchestrated smear during other crises.

Mr. Hannity recently published a timeline of his own comments on the virus, which creates a revisionist impression that he was consistently raising concerns. The examples Mr. Hannity cites include his praise of the Trump administration’s response and declarations that the “greatest” and “best” scientists are working on the virus.

And in his interview with the president last week, Mr. Hannity cast blame on President Barack Obama for the deaths during the swine flu outbreak of 2009, saying Mr. Trump had been “very gracious” by not focusing on his predecessor’s failings, which he accused the news media of ignoring.

Stoking a sense of victimization, according to the president’s critics, is what has always worked for him.

“It’s a hoax, it’s a Democratic plot — that’s the degree to which Trump and Trumpism is fueled by grievance and a sense of constantly having to fight for survival,” said Steve Schmidt, the Republican strategist who advised John McCain’s 2008 presidential campaign and is now a consultant for an anti-Trump group and an analyst for NBC News.

But treating a pandemic as politics as usual, Mr. Schmidt added, could have an extraordinary cost. “All the bombast and the delusional statements and the embrace of ignorance,” he said, “stand singularly alone at the top of a previously unreachable pyramid.”

There can be little doubt that many of the president’s supporters did not consider it bombast or delusion.

Calling into Rush Limbaugh’s program on March 13 — the day Mr. Trump declared a national emergency — Brian from Richmond, Va., urged the president to tell the nation to take a deep breath. “Wash your hands. Take precautions,” Brian said. “And don’t believe the fake news and the media hype. It’s not that serious.”

<|endoftext|>

Good morning and welcome to On Politics, a daily political analysis of the 2020 elections based on reporting by New York Times journalists.

Sign up here to get On Politics in your inbox every weekday.

President Trump’s hopes that the economy would be “opened up” by Easter have come to an end. He announced on Sunday that the federal government would extend social-distancing guidelines until at least the end of April in its fight against the coronavirus. Trump also walked back his threat to institute a quarantine in the New York tristate area, the most heavily infected part of the country; instead, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention issued a 14-day travel advisory telling residents of New York, New Jersey and Connecticut to “refrain from nonessential domestic travel.”

Though it is an election year, Trump’s main Democratic counterpart in the news media hasn’t been a presidential candidate. It’s been the governor of New York, Andrew Cuomo, whose measured, pathos-laden (and, significantly, largely factual) daily news conferences are typically accompanied by slide shows with information graphics. Even as he joins forces with the federal government to confront the crisis, Cuomo has made hard-to-miss digs at Trump — while presenting himself as a leader ready to take charge. “We have been behind on this virus from Day 1,” he said on Sunday. The governor said that rather than being “reactive,” he was seeking to “be proactive, get ahead of it.”

Meanwhile, Joe Biden is struggling to find a comfortable register in this virus-driven news cycle — or, for that matter, to tie the loop on the Democratic nomination in a virus-halted election. No candidate has ever lost the nomination after leading by as much as he is now. But amid all this upheaval, his arguments for electability aren’t looking ironclad. A newly released poll from ABC News and The Washington Post shows Biden neck-and-neck with Trump in a general election matchup. And Biden lags badly in terms of voter passion. Just 24 percent of his supporters say they’re “very enthusiastic” about supporting him, compared with a majority of Trump voters, according to the poll. 

This year’s elections could become the first virtual campaign in history. And here’s another first: More than three million people filed for unemployment in just one week, quadrupling the previous record. How politicians respond to the needs of millions who now find themselves unable to pay rent or buy groceries will help define their legacies. “This is the question that is going to dominate the election: How did you perform in the great crisis?” Tom Cole, a Republican congressman from Oklahoma, told our reporters Jonathan Martin, Reid J. Epstein and Maggie Haberman. As they point out in a new article, this year’s campaign could end up being radically shortened: It could be hard for national politicians — let alone down-ballot candidates — to rise above the noise of coronavirus anxieties until at least the start of autumn. 

President Trump and Defense Secretary Mark Esper watched the Comfort, a Navy hospital ship, depart Norfolk, Va., for New York City on Saturday to support the city’s response to the coronavirus.

By Matt Stevens

The past several weeks have been trying for everyone. And Asian-Americans in particular have had to worry about not only their health, but also their safety.

Hundreds of Asian-Americans have reported facing verbal, physical or other race-based attacks at the hands of bigots who blame them for the coronavirus outbreak. The stories have been harrowing and sad.

As an Asian-American myself, I have been getting texts from friends whose parents are terrified to go out in public wearing masks or who have come home shaken after being demeaned at work. So I started calling leaders of the Asian-American community to see how they were feeling and what they were hearing from their friends, families and constituents.

As it turned out, they were also unnerved. Federal lawmakers, a former presidential candidate and leaders of nonprofit groups said that they were hearing from their scared parents, just as my friends had been, and that they themselves were feeling uneasy in public.

The sad lesson I heard again and again went something like this: It doesn’t matter if you immigrated here 30 years ago, if you were born here or even if you were elected to Congress. The hateful episodes over the past several weeks have reminded even the nation’s most prominent Asian-Americans that some people in this country will always view them as outsiders.



On Politics is also available as a newsletter. Sign up here to get it delivered to your inbox.

Is there anything you think we’re missing? Anything you want to see more of? We’d love to hear from you. Email us at onpolitics@nytimes.com.

<|endoftext|>



The merciless threat slipped into America,

emptying its streets, shuttering its stores.

In this new America, once crowded cities now feel abandoned.

as if everyone suddenly moved out.


But there are also new kinds of connections.

This was America over 24 hours this week.

On pause and full-tilt, as the sun rose and then set and then rose again on a profoundly altered nation.

The merciless threat slipped into America, emptying its streets, shuttering its stores, wrecking its economy and forcing its people to retreat indoors.

In this new country, once crowded cities now feel abandoned, as if everyone suddenly moved out. There is no rush hour on the nation’s highways. “Closed” signs hang from the front doors of business after business.

For many, this coronavirus pandemic involves the most dramatic kind of fight — for life, for food, for money. For others, it can feel absurdly trifling as they stay inside — a fight against boredom, binge eating, isolation.

There was Kalee Kamer, in Portsmouth, Ohio, 27 months sober and motivated to stay that way, participating in a recovery meeting that has moved online. Chris Allison, patrolling the quiet city of Norman, Okla., in a sanitized police vehicle and with a blue face mask. And the Rev. Rob Lee, a pastor in Newton, N.C., without a congregation, summoning hope amid the gloom.

This was America over 24 hours this past week, on pause and full-tilt, as the sun rose and then set and then rose again on a profoundly altered nation.

6:30 a.m.

A trip to a ventanita, in Miami culture, is not just about the $1.82 cup of sweet and foamy cafecito. It is about conversation and gossip, a hangout for nosy retirees and chatty working stiffs. Queuing is taboo. Wriggling and squeezing are the ways to reach the counter.

Or at least they were.

Flouting social distancing rules, crowds continued to congregate outside ventanitas, so much so that the county mayor threatened to shut them down. Sergio’s, where the espresso machine continues to whirl and buzz, rushed to tape markers — six feet apart — on the ground.

Now customers approach with caution, peering through new panes of plexiglass to order. Many scurry off with their provisions tucked in a brown paper bag.

“This is my only outing,” said Daisy Abreu, 58, who works in magazines and left with one café con leche, one guava pastry and two empanadas.

But first she lingered for a moment to check in with Reinaldo Mesa, a 61-year-old airport contractor who picked up coffee and a medianoche sandwich. He, too, had given up most everything in his daily routine. Except the ventanita.

— Patricia Mazzei

8 a.m.

Sherry Maloney rolled out of bed, strapped on a face mask and headed for the Safeway. Today was toilet paper day. Maybe.

Rumor had it that a shipment of paper products had come in the night before. By 6:30 a.m., she was standing outside, shivering with her husband, fingers crossed she would snag a package.

One man was down to three rolls at home. A woman said she was about ready to cut squares out of cloth diapers. “I’ve been rationing two squares a trip,” said Ms. Maloney, 63.

In the grand scheme of things, a toilet paper shortage at home is certainly not the worst crisis. But it is also certainly not normal in a land of plenty.

Inside the locked store, clerks wiped down shopping carts and spritzed the self-checkout stations. Outside, everyone talked about how a trip to the store had devolved into a Hobbesian supermarket sweep. Jostling lines. Frantic customers. Stressed employees, exposed to God knows what germs for God knows how many hours every day.

“It’s starting to get ugly,” Ms. Maloney said. But it was friendly in line this morning. Two buddies ran into each other — “Don’t shake his hand!” one shouted.

The doors slid open, and Ms. Maloney strode inside.

— Jack Healy

10 a.m.

Tonnia Blount shifted her big yellow school bus into gear and started off on the route she had been running for a decade, only now with no children to pick up and none to drop off. They were all at home, stuck in little bungalows and apartments scattered across the working-class neighborhoods of southeast Atlanta.

But with nearly four in five Atlanta public school students poor enough to qualify for free or reduced lunch, most still needed their cafeteria calories. So this was Ms. Blount’s work for the foreseeable future: pulling her empty bus in front of Martin Luther King Jr. Middle School, loading it up with brown sacks full of breakfast and lunch, and then delivering the sacks out in the maze of narrow streets, more like the driver of an ice-cream truck.

“I know my children,” she said. “I know who is in need.”

Every few blocks, Ms. Blount, 55, stopped the bus and honked until the parents and grandparents and aunties came out. “How many babies?” a co-worker in the back of the bus would ask them, smiling, handing the bags down.

Sometimes they were not babies at all. Bryan Bush, 19, came out of an apartment in sweats and a hoodie. He had been working at Six Flags Over Georgia, the amusement park.

Not anymore, he said. He grabbed a sack of breakfast and a sack of lunch.

— Richard Fausset

11:40 a.m.

Thalia Bardell crouched in front of the laptop she had propped up on a chair, centering it in the roughly three-foot-wide wedge of space between the end of her unmade bed and a dresser.

“Hi, B!” she called out to the screen. “How’s the dogs?”

“They’re trouble,” the screen replied.

Ms. Bardell teaches barre exercises, which are modeled loosely after ballet, to mostly women in their 20s, 30s and 40s. When Boston shut down, her clients begged her to come up with a way to give their minds and bodies a break from idle worry about the pandemic.

Live-streamed exercise instruction was having a moment before the crisis, as home fitness companies like Peloton paired their machines with remote-access instructors. Now teaching remotely is one of the few options instructors have left.

She called the group to attention. “All right guys, let’s go!” Nurses, bartenders, teachers and financial analysts appeared on the screen, following her through a routine of squats and lunges as she snapped her fingers with the precision of a metronome.

“Kerry, that’s a beautiful pace!” she said.

“Maite, lower your hips an inch.”

Ms. Bardell believes in moving quickly so no one has time to dwell on the pain. “You’re in a physically uncomfortable situation right now in your body, and you’re in an emotionally uncomfortable situation in the world,” she said. “And it’s like, we’re going to get through this together, just like we do with every single class.”

— Caitlin Dickerson

12:30 p.m.

Ariana Lee, a Chinese student stranded on the campus of Amherst College, walked into a dining hall past a pandemic-era warning sign: “Admittance Restricted.”

The food service workers lit up when they saw her. She greeted them brightly. “Hi! Can I get the pulled chicken taco over Mexican rice? And some guac with the salsa, please?”

These days, with classes now online, campus feels like a ghost town. In her one-minute walk to the dining hall, Ms. Lee, a senior, encountered only one other person, a janitor pushing a cart full of cleaning supplies across the common room, like a lone ship leaning into a storm.

The servers wore gloves, but no masks. The open cereal dispensers stood empty. The cafeteria tables were cordoned off.

The food was tastier than it was before the pandemic, she said, but the portions were smaller. She preferred not to pick up food in town, though, because “people on the street say racist things.” The other day, a man called her Chinese-American friend a racial expletive and said that wearing a mask would not help.

Her parents have left Beijing and are riding out a two-week quarantine in a small apartment in Hong Kong. They have to wear trackers on their wrists. Food is delivered to their door. Her mother sprays down every package with disinfectant.

Ms. Lee walked back to her dorm room, unpacked her brown paper bag and laid out her food on her desk: two bananas, an orange, a cardboard bowl of rice, a cardboard box of chicken tacos. She looked at it, as if it were a still-life painting, and did not eat.

— Anemona Hartocollis

2:04 pm

The milk incident happened right after lunch, when the 8-year-old was losing patience with long division. It was his second tantrum of the day, the first set off by a missing sweatshirt. That one had been pretty loud, but at least it didn’t involve spilling milk all over the dining room table.

A home-schooling mother as of two weeks ago, Tanying Dong, 39, has been trying to make sure her oldest son does at least some schoolwork every day. When he is absorbed in a lesson and his little brothers, ages 2 and 5, are nestled in the soft glow of PBS Kids, Ms. Dong can then maybe get to some of the endless other tasks. Such as her paying job, in public law. And the housework. The meals. The checking-in on friends and relatives.

Three boys, at prime havoc age, with no school, no day care, no babysitter, no playgrounds, no friends and, for much of the time, no other adult.

Amid it all, she has taken up sewing. Specifically, face masks for the whole family. Ms. Dong’s husband is a pediatric anesthesiologist, and while the children’s hospital is not yet a battlefield infirmary like so many urban emergency rooms, things could change quickly.

The sewing had been going pretty well until the 5-year-old knocked the sewing machine on the floor. Her husband seems to have fixed it. She’ll know tonight when she picks it back up, once the kids are in bed.

— Campbell Robertson

2:49 p.m.

Police Officer Chris Allison pulled over a red Chrysler 300 sedan, approached from the passenger side and asked the driver for his license and insurance. The man pulled the papers from his glove compartment and leaned toward the window. But Officer Allison didn’t touch them.

He reached instead for his cellphone.

“OK, I’m just going to take a picture of that,” Officer Allison told the man.

Officer Allison, 34, patrols southwest Norman, where a stay-at-home order is in effect and four nursing home residents have died from the pandemic. Norman is different now, and so is policing. The most prosaic parts of the job have become potential hazmat situations.

Officers used to sit two to a table for pre-shift briefings at headquarters, but social distancing put an end to roll call. Officers also keep their distance from one another when they go out on calls. On Tuesday, the officer’s lunch got a wipe-down: He used Clorox wipes to disinfect his milkshake, tea and wrapped straws.

At the end of his shift, he used to park his police S.U.V. outside his house, walk inside and hug his wife, 5-year-old daughter and 1-year-old son. Now, he pulls straight into the garage, undresses there, stuffs his uniform into the washing machine, disinfects his equipment and then heads straight for the shower before touching anyone.

It turned out that the Chrysler’s license plate didn’t match the vehicle. Maybe it was stolen. Maybe the driver hadn’t registered it yet. From the driver’s seat of the S.U.V., the officer asked for backup. Then he readied himself to face the driver again. He reached over to the passenger seat for his blue cloth mask.

— Manny Fernandez

4:16 p.m.

Kimberley Mitchell, a second-generation funeral director, gathered the grieving family in her office. In the age of social distancing, her only goal was to help them hang on to the tiniest bit of cultural tradition.

Ms. Mitchell of Mitchell’s Funeral Home looked into the eyes of the family representative seated across the room. A month ago, she would have placed her hand on the relative’s shoulder as a gesture of comfort.

On this afternoon, she gently laid out the dizzying, surreal set of safety rules reshaping how America buries its dead. The family settled on a simple half-hour service in the chapel. It has 22 rows of pews — room for seven mourners, a pastor and two staff members. They also decided to hold a memorial service once the country returned to normal.

“It feels something like ‘to be continued’ for some people saying goodbye to their loved ones,” she said.

Before the crisis, Ms. Mitchell greeted family members reeling from loss with hugs. Now, it was simply too risky. Now mourners had to move through reposing rooms in shifts, one small group at a time.

It was jarring. And exhausting. And unmooring.

But Ms. Mitchell still had her smile and her words. She could still offer hope and the promise of healing by reciting from the 30th chapter of Psalms — “joy cometh in the morning.”

“The hardest thing is to see someone grieving alone,” she said. “Think about that. Alone.”

— Audra D.S. Burch

5:01 p.m.

Dr. Steven Demetropoulos had been seeing patients since 7:10 a.m. He was tired, but he was also a man on a mission.

He needed to drive home in his pickup truck so he could quickly change clothes before heading back out, straight to City Hall, where he hoped to convince the Council to enact a curfew.

In February, Dr. Demetropoulos became the mayor of Pascagoula, a Gulf Coast city of about 21,000 people. He ran on a platform of economic growth and beautification.

But now he also makes videos for residents about how to survive the worst public health crisis in decades. “This is Dr. Steve, your mayor,” he tells them, dressed in green scrubs behind the mayor’s desk.

Tomorrow he would make another video, about how droplets spread through the air and why it was important that people stay six feet apart.

His advice is not limited to physical health.

“Keep trusting, keep praying,” he said in one video. “We will get through this together.”

— Rick Rojas

7 p.m.

Kalee Kamer was in bed, snuggled next to her boyfriend and their cat, Dirtball, participating in a drug recovery meeting streaming on Facebook Live.

Ms. Kamer — 27 months sober after decades of addiction to heroin, meth, crack and whatever else she could get her hands on — lost her burger-joint waitressing job on March 15. She and her boyfriend, Chris Keeton, who is also in recovery, have cleaned the house so thoroughly it practically gleams. They watch four or five virtual recovery meetings a week.

In this small city, the center of Ohio’s opioid epidemic, temptation is never far.

The couple’s gazes are fixed on the Facebook session, hosted by a local drug recovery group called Raw Addiction.

Kathy Newman, a drug treatment counselor nearly nine years in recovery, urged viewers like Ms. Kamer to stick with the program. Flurries of emojis rose across the screen as viewers cheered in support.

Hundreds of comments appeared in real time — testaments of hope and despair that would, in normal times, be shared face-to-face.

I’m afraid of picking up the needle again … I need out.

I’m in rehab.

April 6th will be 18 months clean from shooting up. You guys are such a great inspiration.

Ms. Kamer, 32, wrote one: Did 2 years in prison. Haven’t seen my son in 3.5 years, been clean 27 months. He is a huge motivation on why I’m still clean! #goals

It was one voice in an ocean.

I got 31 days.

First time watcher.

I am so close to breaking.

— Dan Levin

9 p.m.

The schedule promised a matchup between the Los Angeles Dodgers and the Colorado Rockies. But Dodger Stadium is empty, its doors locked shut, and outside, the birds are louder than what is left of traffic in one of America’s most congested cities.

All the familiar faces are somewhere else. The guys hawking T-shirts, the guys selling beers out of coolers, the guys scalping tickets, the women cooking bacon-wrapped hot dogs just before the final uphill into the stadium parking lots, blocked off with signs that now say “No public access.”

Solitary joggers passed by, one after another, under billboards advertising season tickets for a season in limbo. A man in a surgical mask walked his pug.

Alex Wood, the 29-year-old left-hander, was scheduled to pitch for the Dodgers. Right about now, the Rockies would be finishing batting practice, and Mr. Wood would be in the clubhouse going over the game plan with his catcher and pitching coach. Instead, he’s a few hundred miles away in Arizona, crashing at a teammate’s house. He said he was throwing most days, and just trying to maintain “some semblance of sanity.”

During what would have been game time, he said, he was doing pretty much what every other American was doing. Eating. Watching television. Sleeping.

Mr. Wood counseled patience for frustrated fans. “Let that excitement continue to build,” he said, “and let it loose once we start our season.”

— Tim Arango

11 p.m.

Donna Danahy was sitting on a mattress in a hotel just off the interstate, queasy from the rising waves of dread and uncertainty.

Ms. Danahy, 58, lost her job as a server at Steak ’n Shake a couple of weeks back when it moved to drive-through only. With that, she lost the income needed to pay the first month’s rent — $600 — on what was supposed to be a new studio apartment.

A co-worker she had been staying with left town, leaving Ms. Danahy homeless. For several days she parked her 2006 Toyota Camry in a truck stop, drawing down curtains attached with Velcro, sliding a sun visor in the windshield and tucking her 5-foot-1-inch frame into the back seat for a nerve-racking attempt at sleep. Sometimes she closed her eyes and wished she would never wake up. Sometimes she was hard on herself for not securing a more stable existence.

“Leading up to this, I felt all this was self-induced; I did this to myself,” she said.

The plan had been to move into the new place on April 1. But the landlord told Ms. Danahy she would release her unit if she could not come up with the money by April 14. She was hired for a $13-an-hour job at a grocery store deli but could not start until she got her birth certificate, which was on its way in the mail.

A social services organization secured her the hotel room for a week. But what would she do once the week was up? She began to cry. It was hard not to feel vulnerable. She has asthma. She wondered if she would get infected from all the moving around.

— John Eligon

12:40 a.m.

Tammy Wiatrowski curled up on a lilac sectional with a writing tray and a floral-patterned journal.

She has been writing in it since early March, after working 57 hours over four days as a charge nurse in a critical care unit. It had dealt with the first spate of the nation’s deaths, a crunch of supplies, quarantined employees and a dire uncertainty.

“As the weekend went on and more patients lost their battle with the virus, I realized both my daughters and all 5 of my grandkids could get this and might not survive.”

She told her daughters that weekend that it might be months before they could spend time together. Her home has been quiet ever since. No slumber parties. The Nerf guns sit unused. The video game console is off. Ms. Wiatrowski has instead gone shopping, leaving groceries at her daughter’s doorstep and stepping back.

“Only to be able to wave as she opened the door. Telling them ‘I love them!’ My grandson saying, ‘It’s OK, Granny, I can give you an invisible hug!’ as he stretched his arms out …”

For the first time in 14 years, her job has distanced her from the ones she loves. It is the same for her patients.

Ms. Wiatrowski cannot bring families in to hold hands during the last breaths. She cannot wrap her arms around those who are in grief. She cannot help them get a talisman, like a lock of hair or an EKG strip.

“I can’t even give them a piece of paper with their heartbeat without feeling like it’s contaminated. Now everything feels contaminated.”

— Mike Baker

1 a.m.

In the manner of academic scientists during normal times, at the end of a day that was light years from normal, Enrique Lin Shiao led with the data.

Never mind that the prestigious University of California, Berkeley, biology laboratory where he is a postdoctoral fellow was shuttered for regular research studies. Or that Dr. Lin Shiao, 31, was presenting his results to disembodied colleagues in a Slack channel as he ate dinner.

What mattered was that providing the data to the Food and Drug Administration was a prerequisite for clearance to perform much-needed clinical tests for the new coronavirus.

And the data was good.

“Awesome work,” typed Jennifer Doudna, a Berkeley professor who runs the Innovative Genomics Institute, as she studied Dr. Lin Shiao’s graphs from her living room.

The dearth of tests available to Americans who may be infected has anguished molecular biologists, whose research routinely invokes the basic procedure used to detect virus genes in a patient’s nasal swab.

Dr. Doudna, the co-developer of a gene-editing tool called CRISPR, has transformed the first floor of her institute into a testing center that aims to process at least 1,000 samples a day. But first, the group needed to show the F.D.A. the lowest level of virus its test could detect.

As some of Dr. Lin Shiao’s colleagues appended congratulatory “clapping” and “on fire” icons to the charts that indicated the test was highly sensitive, others looked ahead, to when they would begin again.

— Amy Harmon

5 a.m.

The sky over Central Park was slate gray, with pinpoints of stars dim amid the city’s stubborn glow.

The East Meadow, its lush grass preserved by fences and “Keep Off” signs for an anticipated summer of sun tanning and picnics, was instead bathed in a sea of white medical tents brought by truck from North Carolina to aid the city’s overwhelmed hospitals.

The tents — 14 in all — were empty, save for 68 portable metal beds, neatly laid with identical white sheets and pillows.

Samaritan’s Purse, a Christian charity, drove in its own supplies. Once the field hospital gets final administrative approval from health department officials to operate, the city will supply the patients.

In the I.C.U. tent, there were 10 beds, each accompanied by the most desired piece of medical equipment in the world — a ventilator, which can cost upward of $50,000.

Samaritan’s Purse has used the same field hospital to treat families stricken by Ebola in Liberia, to care for townspeople who had been trapped in rubble after an earthquake in Ecuador, and to operate on children in Iraq who had been struck by shrapnel launched by the Islamic State.

A few weeks ago, it set up a similar field hospital in Cremona, Italy, the nation with the world’s most coronavirus fatalities. This is the first time one of the hospitals has been deployed in the United States. No one knows how long a field hospital will be needed in the center of Manhattan.

— Timothy Williams

6 a.m.

The sky was still dark when the Rev. Rob Lee sat down at his desk, picked up his fountain pen and began to write.

Even in normal times, Mr. Lee, 27, is an early riser. But in the weeks since a pandemic put an end to all routines, including Sunday church, he has been waking up earlier and earlier, no need for an alarm.

He thinks about his congregation of about 50 regulars and the “collective pain” shared across the world right now. He thinks about his wife, who lost hours at her marketing job. He thinks about his mother, a hospice nurse. And, if he is being honest, he thinks about himself, his own mortality. A year and a half ago, a lung collapsed during an asthma attack, leaving him especially vulnerable to the outbreak.

A few weeks ago, as the crisis intensified, he issued an online callout for prayer requests and offered to send handwritten letters in return. So far, he has received more than 300:

I am alone in California and far from family.

I just lost my job today.

I feel lonely and unsettled in these times.

Mr. Lee, a descendant of General Robert E. Lee who once made headlines for speaking out against white supremacy and Confederate monuments, sees the current crisis as another pivotal moment for the country.

Writing back to the supplicants has become both a grounding ritual to calm his own anxieties — and a small act of resistance.

“It’s a sense of, we’re going to show up,” he said. “The coronavirus is terrible, but it’s not the fullness of who we are as a people. It’s not the end of our story.”

— Sarah Mervosh

transcript

So I am standing outside of the Safeway supermarket in Erie, Colorado, and it is toilet paper day. There are three people standing out here in the cold around 6:30 in the morning, and I’m going to go talk to them.

Hello, how are you guys?

Never thought in my whole life, in 63 and a half years, I’d be crawling my butt out of bed at 5:30 looking for toilet paper.

[LAUGHS] And did you have the intel that this place got its toilet paper shipment in?

We were here Saturday, and one nice young lady, when Marty asked about toilet paper, said, our truck is coming Monday, and we’ll be open at 7:00 a.m.

OK.

And I said, honey, guess where we’re going tomorrow morning?

I’ve been rationing two squares a trip for a couple of weeks now.

Well, I went to Walmart —



The T.P. calculator on Facebook said I had three days worth, and I’m like, no, this doesn’t work for me.

[LAUGHTER]

Here we go. The magic moment. Run, run.



From The New York Times, I’m Michael Barbaro. This is “The Daily.” Today:

How are you feeling physically right now? Are people trying at all to stay away from one another? Or is that not even possible?

As much of America enters its second month of lockdown to contain the coronavirus.

So I guess, are there other patients that are there today that you are thinking about today? Is there something about them that really sticks in your mind?

My colleagues speak to people in Pittsburgh, Kansas City, New York and Seattle about their new realities.

 It’s Monday, April 13.

Hello?

Hey, Campbell.

Good.

I’m sorry. Did you say — did you ask me a question?

Just saying, how are you doing?

Uh, you know, today was up and down. [LAUGHS]

Take me around, and as we’re going, you can tell me about your day so far.

Let me see. Is there a way to flip up —

I’m Campbell Robertson. I’m a national correspondent based in Pittsburgh. I spoke with a neighbor of mine, Tanying Dong. Well, just show me where people are stationed at the moment.

Oh, well, all the kids are watching TV in the basement, and I can’t really —

[LAUGHS]

I don’t really want to deal with them right now, because they’re just, you know — they’re just them.

She works in public law, and she’s been working at home for the last few weeks. Her husband works at a hospital here, so she’s basically been the lone caregiver for their three boys. They’re two, five and eight years old.

I don’t know. What else do you want to see?

So tell me about today. How’s it going today?

Uh, today, uh —

Do you want more scrambled eggs?

Oh, no!

It was a relatively calm morning, actually.

[CRYING]

I’m getting your cereal, buddy.

Why? Why? Why? Why? Why?

Kind of a quiet morning, and then they ate, and —

Hey. Yan? Yan?

I had Yan do some homework. I had the other two just watch TV.

Before you start the TV, you got to do some homework, OK?

I tried to get some work done mid-morning, which I did. I finished one project. So it was fine and then —

[SCREAMING] No!

My oldest one had one major tantrum where he was just screaming, because he couldn’t find his sweatshirt.

Oh.

It’s like his favorite sweatshirt. It turned out it was on one of the strollers outside.

[SCREAMING] No!

Why would you leave it in the stroller? It’s your sweatshirt. You’re responsible for it.

[SCREAMING] No!

Did he have schoolwork today, your 8-year-old?

Yeah. So we’re on Google Classroom. I’ll show you. They post classwork here. This is math, reading, creative writing. And then apparently, they were supposed to play the Oregon Trail game, but I wasn’t able to get it to work. But at one point during his homework, he had a big mug of milk, and he spilled it all over the table.

Oh no!

That was a lot of [EXPLETIVE] from me.

[LAUGHTER]



There were some tantrums over division. He’s doing division now, and you know he’s still trying to grok the concept. I think he’s pretty much familiar with multiplication. I don’t know how good he is at it, but he’s been able to do it without a lot of tears. Division is still tears. So we just —

It’s divisive.

— it’s divisive, yeah. Exactly. [LAUGHS] Yeah.

[SCREAMING]

Yeah.

What’s his — I mean, he seems like a chill guy usually. I mean, am I —

Oh, uh, no.

No! What? [SCREAMING]

So how were the 3 and 5-year-old today?

They were good. They were —

Can you go pee-pee? [INAUDIBLE]

I can, yes. But we’re working on you right now.

The other two, I have been just generally letting them float along and whatever they want to do. Occasionally they’ll get sick of the TV, and they’ll want to just come upstairs and do something non-TV related, and it’s good and bad. It’s like, oh, that’s nice, you’re using your imagination. But on the other hand, it’s like, please just go watch TV and don’t destroy the house.

Yeah.

Yeah, so the little one just likes to kind of run laps around the house, which is great, because that kind of wears him out a little bit.

[CRYING]

Or — hold on a second.

Yeah.

[CRYING]

I think —

— milk!

What? What’s wrong? What?

[INAUDIBLE] milk.

You want milk? You want milk?

Yeah.

Here, I’ll get you milk. Sorry.

Here you go. Want to say hi to Campbell?

Hi.

Hi. How are you? Are you having fun?

I’m a baby.

You’re a baby?

[LAUGHS] Yeah. Apparently he’s a baby again.

OK. We all get there eventually.

[LAUGHTER]



I think generally, we’re settling into our routine. I mean, that first two weeks was rough, but —

Why?

Just having a hard time accepting that, oh my god, all three of my kids are going to be home all the time, and I’m going to be pretty much by myself with them the entire time. And oh my god, how am I going to handle this? Because I haven’t had to do this in — I have never had to do this. I think by now, they’re used to being at home. They’re used to this. Whatever this is, so.

Well, there’s not really a choice at this point.

Yep, yep. We’re all condemned to be with each other, basically. [LAUGHS]

Listen, thank you, Tanying.

All right.

Appreciate it.

Thanks, Campbell.

Bye.

Bye. Take care.

You too.



Donna? Hey, it’s John.

Nice to meet you.

With The New York Times. How are you doing?

I’m good. How are you?

Doing well, doing well. I guess we should probably keep our distance, right? [LAUGHS]

I’m John Eligon, a reporter based in Kansas City. So how are you doing? How was today for you?

It was good. It was actually good. I slept all day. Not all day, but I slept late, and —

A few weeks ago, I spoke with Donna Danahy. Sleeping sometimes is a good thing, right?

Yeah. I needed it.

Yeah. I can imagine. Who lost her job when the economy slowed down in the wake of the virus. So I guess, take me back to the beginning. Just tell me how you got in this position that you are in.

I was working at Steak ‘n Shake. I had been working there for nine months. And a couple weeks ago, they told us at midnight that night they were shutting down except for the drive-through. And my friend, which I was staying with, she went to stay with her boyfriend, which moved to Iowa. And she was going to go anyway, but she just — we lost our job, so she just went ahead and went. And that put me in my car with my cat.

And so how long were you staying in your car for?

Two weeks. It’s been two weeks today, I think.

And what was that like, being in the car?

It was rainy, it was cold. Some nights wasn’t so bad, but the worst thing was going to the bathroom. Because in the beginning, I could walk into, like, Walmart and go to the bathroom or the gas station. I stayed at Flying J a couple times. I parked there, and I don’t even know if they’re still offering showers, but I could pay to take a shower for $12.

So you were going to a truck stop to shower for $12?

Yeah, at first I was staying there. But like today, most the bathrooms are closed. There’s just no place to go. And sometimes when I went to sleep, I just wanted to stay asleep, because I didn’t know what to do with myself.

I don’t know. It was just scary. A lot of things ran through my head. I called for resources and talked to this lady. She said, well, maybe we could put you in a hotel for a day or so. And I was happy with that. She called me back and she told me that they had me a room, and I came in, and I checked in. They gave me the rules, and I’ve been here ever since. It’s awesome. It’s great to have a place to go. And my cat, just like — you should have seen her when she went into room. She was in heaven. I buy her little treats, I buy her little toys, just because she’s been through hell too. And nobody can take care of her but me, and I’m not doing a very good job. I don’t know. I leave here Friday, and I don’t know what’s going to happen. And I’m going to be back out there again, and I’m having a hard time. I’m having a hard time with that.

But last week, I found a job. My friend, she worked for Cosentino’s for years.

Supermarket?

Yeah. And so me and her went down there together and spoke with him. And we had to go back a couple of days later because we had talked to corporate. It took me forever to get ready. It’s hard to do in the car, especially when it’s raining. When your clothes are in your trunk, getting ready and dressed in the backseat, washing your hair out of a milk jug, water jug, brushing your teeth, trying to find something to wear out the trunk of my car. But I don’t know where my birth certificate is or my social security card. I thought that I could use my passport. My passport expired so she couldn’t accept that, but it’s just pinning my birth certificate.

OK, gotcha.

And my friend that got me the job, she’s worked seven days straight right now.

Really? Wow.

And so, I just see her go to work every day. I’m like, dang. I want to go. I want to go.

We’ll be right back.



I’m Alan Feuer. I’m a reporter for The New York Times metro desk. A couple of weeks ago, I had spoken to an inmate named Foster Thompson. Foster is a 55-year-old New Yorker who was arrested and sent to prison for a murder on Staten Island in 1992. He’s been in the state prison system ever since. And recently, he’s been at Sing Sing for the last three years, where there have been, according to state officials, at least two cases of the coronavirus in the prison population. So anyhow, we’re expecting a call from Foster in the next few minutes, and he’s going to tell us about conditions in Sing Sing right now.

Hello? Can you hear me, Foster?

Yeah. I can hear you, yup.

Great. So it’s Monday morning, and I just wonder if you could describe for me where you are now and what’s around you.

Well, right now I’m in a little phone booth room, and it’s the fourth floor in building eight.

Got it. Now, how long have you been in the state prison system?

Since ‘94.

How did these last couple of weeks compare to other crisis times in your time in prison?

People was more panicked in here. Dudes was yelling last night and a few this morning. They’re not testing nobody, but it’s corona. You know they don’t give a F about us. But yeah, last night, you had — at least it sounded like from four different areas — coughing and sneezing all night, literally all night. You know, I got asthma. I had it all my life. I also had a collapsed lung, so I worry about it all the time. I clean my cell thoroughly constantly to wipe the bars down and the gate. I wash my hands and stuff thoroughly, probably like, 50 some times a day. I mean, this is literally, seriously, not just exaggerating. Use the Dove soap and that Ajax dishwashing liquid because it does kill bacteria. That’s the best I could do. When I’m in the yard, I try to stay my distance. But when I’ve got to go to the phone, I mean, you’ve got no choice. I’ve got a couple of socks that I wash out that I use. I use the sock to cover the whole phone when I’m talking on the phone. You can’t avoid nobody here. It’s totally, totally impossible.

How many people have been using these phones recently?

The ones in the yard, everybody every day they use the phones constantly. You know, it could be 400 guys out there at a given time. And if everybody is piled up on top of each other, I mean, literally, side by side or right behind your head. You know, everybody standing up and bunch up there, waiting until they hear their name called to get on the phone.

Have the phone calls increased because of the decision to cut of prison visitation?

Yeah, most definitely. Most definitely. But they do have some bleach and water solution that they squirt on a rag, and they wiped the phones off. Every 23 guys get off, they wipe it down before the next ones get on. So they is doing that.

Now, you said you have washed your hands compulsively. You’re worried.

Yeah.

And yet you go out to the yard phone to use that phone. Why do those calls matter to you so much at this point, Foster?

Because it’s to let my wife and my kids know that I’m all right. And I can’t even express how they feel if they don’t hear from me, especially my wife and my daughters. They’d be in a panic, honestly. They need me to call. I got a need to hear from them just as much. It’s just crazy, man. I am really feeling it, man. The way it’s going in here, it just seems like it’s just a matter of time before it gets spread all through this place.

Well, look, Foster, we really appreciate your taking time to do this. And please stay safe. OK?

Yeah. Yeah, I’m trying, man. That’s number one, try to stay safe and stay healthy in this place, man.

Thanks, Foster. Bye.



Is this like a normal journal for you? Or is one you’re just like —

No, this is a normal. You know, my dad had told me a long time ago, some of the stories that I have taking care of patients, just jot them down. It’s kind of like those old “Chicken Soup for the Soul.” You just jot down little things that took your heart or that is really special to you, or really sad or hard for you. And so I started doing that years ago — would drop down —

I’m Mike Baker, a reporter based in Seattle. And a couple of weeks ago, I spoke to Tammy Wiatrowski, a nurse at the hospital that faced, really, the initial brunt of coronavirus cases and deaths in the United States.

So at the end of a night that’s hard — like an the end of a 12-hour shift — I can get my pad, get my journal, and then just sit there and kind of process stuff.

Yeah.

When the virus first hit —

And this hit, and it was like, [GROANS], I have this deep sinking. I just want to get this stuff out.

Tammy began a new journal to chronicle what was happening. So I asked her to read from it.

OK. So this was started Friday, February 28. This was my first day of a four-day stretch as charge in our I.C.U.:

That evening, we received the first two Covid-19 positive results in two of our patients, one whom had just succumbed to the virus. As the evening nurses were making their way in for their shift, our infectious disease director, Dr. Riedo (ph) came to let the staff know that the virus was here, and that we had more patients that we needed to test.

I get emotional when I think about that night. We all glanced across the room with a very blank look of shock on our faces. It was very surreal.

I immediately thought about my four grandsons that were supposed to have their monthly slumber party with granny in two weeks. Knowing that I would have to make that call, letting them know that I wouldn’t be able to have this month’s slumber party, or maybe even the next, that my newest little granddaughter of just a year and a half would look and act so much bigger in those next few weeks while I was unable to see her.

Looking around the room at my other co-workers, I could tell they were probably thinking of their loved ones as well. Then we all nodded our head as if saying, yes. Without a word said, it was just understood. Let’s do this.

The next several days and weeks at work became planned maneuvers like a well-oiled machine. The nurses and doctors working so close together to isolate and treat these patients, yet the art of nursing changed.

As a nurse, I’ve always felt that if I couldn’t help save a life and that patient dies, that I could help the family through the worst day of their life, and I still would go home feeling rewarded. I might cry all the way home, or for weeks or months to come, but if I comfort the family and guide them through the process of grief, then I still feel like I’ve done something good. That I have cared, and that I’ve helped.

Now with how we have to isolate these patients, we are not able to have the families be with their loved ones as they pass. They don’t get to spend the last few days of their life with them. They don’t get to hold their hand as they take their last breath. As a nurse, I can’t convey my sympathy and put my arms around them.

At this point, I got mad.

What can I give them? What last memory did we just change by having to protect them, both the family and the community? These changes are needed under these circumstances, but they are changing the way a nurse provides the care and compassion during this time. Now we find ways to show our care and our hearts through the phone, by telling them that we remind the patient that their family sends their love. That they called, that they checked in, and that they love them.

And then later on March 20, I wrote, “My life changed.” I realized probably for the first time in my career, to help others has distanced me from the ones I love. Life is on pause. At times, I’m jealous for some of the doctors and nurses that get to go home to their families and small children.

As I walk by the kids’ playroom, one of the bedrooms in my house with the bunk beds and toys and video games, it’s quiet.

I don’t hear the laughs and screams as the three youngest chase each other with Nerf guns. Several times on my day off, I’ve walked by and looked into the room just to see their bunk beds empty, the pillows that say “relax” and “love,” and nobody’s little head on them. It makes me sad for a moment, but then I have to think when this is over, we’re going to have the biggest slumber party ever. And they always know granny loves them. For that, I’m grateful.



We’ll be right back.

Here’s what else you need to know today. A former Senate aide to Joe Biden has filed a criminal complaint over an alleged incident in which she says Biden sexually assaulted her in 1993, an allegation Biden denies. The Times reports that a friend confirmed that the former aide, Tara Reade, told her the details of the allegation at the time, and that Reade told a second friend about it in 2008.

But three former Biden staff members, who Reade said she reported the incident to, said they have no memory of such conversations, and a complaint that Reade said she filed to the Senate at the time has not been found. And over the weekend, the United States surpassed Italy in the total number of confirmed deaths from the coronavirus — more than 20,000. Meanwhile in Britain, Prime Minister Boris Johnson was released from a London hospital after being treated in an intensive care unit for his infection. Finally.

[SINGING IN LATIN]

[SINGING IN LATIN]

In Italy, Pope Francis led an Easter Vigil inside an almost empty St. Peter’s Basilica, calling on his followers not to succumb to fear during the pandemic.

[SPEAKING ITALIAN]

Instead, the Pope called on Catholics around the world to be quote, “the messengers of life in a time of death.”

(SINGING) Hallelujah.

[SINGING IN LATIN]

That’s it for “The Daily.” I’m Michael Barbaro. See you tomorrow.

(SINGING) Hallelujah.

<|endoftext|>

The cars arrived at the food bank in southern Dallas in a stream — a minivan, a Chevrolet Tahoe, a sedan with a busted window, a Jaguar of unclear vintage. Inside the vehicles sat people who scarcely could believe they needed to be there.

There was a landscaper, a high school administrator, a college student, and Dalen Lacy, a warehouse worker and 7-Eleven clerk.

Like 70 percent of the people who showed up at Crossroads Community Services one day last week, Mr. Lacy had never been there before. But when the coronavirus pandemic drove the economy off a cliff, Mr. Lacy, 27 and a father of two, lost his warehouse job and saw his hours at 7-Eleven slashed.

“I’ve never had to actually do this,” Mr. Lacy said, after a gloved pantry worker hefted a box of food into the trunk of the car he was riding in along with two neighbors. “But I’ve got to do what I’ve got to do for my kids.”

By the hundreds of thousands, Americans are asking for help for the first time in their lives, from nail technicians in Los Angeles to airport workers in Fort Lauderdale, from bartenders in Phoenix to former reality show contestants in Minnesota. Biting back shame, and wondering guiltily about others in more dire straits, they are applying for unemployment, turning to GoFundMe, asking for money on Instagram, quietly accepting handouts from equally strapped co-workers, and showing up in unprecedented numbers at food banks, which in turn are struggling to meet soaring demand as volunteers, many of them retirees, stay home for safety.



David Greenfield, chief executive of Met Council, a nonprofit that provides food and housing assistance in New York City, said that at first, “we saw retail workers, chefs and waiters, and restaurant owners.” 

By last week, he said, they were seeing employees from law firms: “Folks who in many cases were employed their entire lives.”

In its unsparing breadth, the crisis is pitting two American ideals against each other — the e pluribus unum credo of solidarity and its near-religious devotion to the idea that hard work brings rewards. Those notions coexist peacefully in prosperous times.

Today, both are being put to the test, forcing the newly unemployed to re-evaluate beliefs about themselves and their country.

In St. Louis Park, Minn., Scott Theusch, 61, a mechanic, filed for unemployment benefits for the first time, becoming one of the record-shattering 3.3 million people who made claims across the country in one week. He set aside his deeply felt conviction that people who had to seek the aid, which is largely funded by payroll taxes on employers, weren’t trying hard enough. “There really isn’t any option for people,” Mr. Theusch said. “They’re told not to show up for work, so what do you do?”

In Los Angeles, Samantha Pasaye, a 29-year-old nail technician, pleaded for donations on Instagram after the salon where she worked shut its doors. The request made her mother cry. “I’m not someone who asks for help,” Ms. Pasaye said. “I do everything by myself. But at this moment, I needed to put my pride aside.”

Another new Dallas food-bank client, Adedyo Codrington, a trade-show worker and union steward, filed for unemployment as soon as his jobs were canceled on March 8. But the first check would not arrive in time.

So Mr. Codrington, a 41-year-old father of two, went to the food bank, only to learn its supplies had run out. Humiliated, he tried again last week, arriving early. But people were already lined up around the block by then, and he left with a lone bag of green beans. Colleagues scrounged together $100 for him, but it is nearly gone, and he is down to eating just one meal a day, living off sugar water and what he calls “wish sandwiches” — two slices of bread with imaginary filling.

“To go from making $1,500 to $2,000 a week,” he said, “to be reduced to this.”

Even with America’s long tradition of giving, from immigrant-aid groups begun by religious organizations in the 19th century to the politically polarizing social welfare programs born in the 20th, rugged individualism has remained a defining feature of the national identity. Perhaps no class of worker is more lionized today than the start-up tech entrepreneur.

“A lot of people in the United States are very proud of feeling self-sufficient and independent,” Alice Fothergill, a professor of sociology at the University of Vermont who has studied the human effects of natural disasters. “This is something that is definitely going to be very, very difficult.”

She said that people who feel ashamed about seeking help are often the ones who need it the most. In one study of women who had endured devastating floods in North Dakota, she found that working-class and middle-class women were the ones who despaired most about needing public assistance, because of a fear of a loss of status. They did not want to be seen as poor. They also engaged in techniques to make it clear — to themselves and others — that they were accepting charity reluctantly, such as offering to pay for donated items and refusing to refer to their government-supplied trailers as “home.”

Mr. Greenfield, of New York’s Met Council, said the scores of people approaching his charity for the first time are roundly apologetic: “They’re saying: ‘I’m sorry but can you help me? I’m sorry but I need food, I’m sorry but I need rent, I’m sorry but I need help.’”

For people of some means, deciding whether to file for benefits also involves second-guessing. Does the fact that others are in greater need mean that they should not apply, even if they are qualified?

Kirk DeWindt, 36, a personal trainer from Brooklyn Park, Minn. and a three-time contestant on “The Bachelor” television franchise, saw his business come to a halt after all in-person sessions had to be canceled. He has some savings, so when his mother urged him to apply for unemployment benefits, Mr. DeWindt hesitated.

“I’m in a more privileged situation than I would assume most that are filing,” he said. “So what do you do with that?” He decided he would file.

The anonymity of the internet has helped some charity-seekers get over any shame, with restaurant and other business owners setting up online fund-raising campaigns that keep their workers’ names private. On GoFundMe, some $120 million has been donated for campaigns related to the pandemic since the first week in March, a spokeswoman said. By comparison, that is more than four times as much as campaigns for the Australian wildfires raised in three months.

But unlike natural disasters, the pandemic has hit a far greater swath of people hard, making it difficult for some to gin up help. And some campaigns have fallen short.

In Phoenix, Raven Green, a 28-year-old single mother of two young girls, turned to GoFundMe after losing all three of her jobs — bartending, promotional work and singing gigs — in less than a week.

Ms. Green was terrified. She had a few days’ worth of groceries but her car payment had wiped her out, and she wasn’t sure she qualified for benefits. She set up a GoFundMe page seeking $1,500 but, abashed at having to ask for help, couldn’t bring herself to share it on social media. “I don’t want people to know that I’m struggling like this,” she said. As of Tuesday afternoon, the campaign had no donations. 

(After this article appeared online Tuesday evening, she quickly raised double her original goal. “Bless you all!” she wrote to her donors.)

The abrupt change in circumstances may perhaps be toughest for people who reordered their whole lives around the American dream: immigrants.

Alex Rotaru, 48, a filmmaker and actor in Beverly Hills who left Romania at age 21, said, “the idea of welfare from a communist country was quite natural to me.”

“When I came to America,” he said, “I never thought I would need it.”

He was wrestling with the idea of filing for unemployment after all his work screeched to a halt. Then he considered the stack of bills he faced. “There was a certain embarrassment and I got over it quick thinking about my son,” he said.

Ernst Virgile, 38, moved from Haiti with his wife in 2012, determined to work tirelessly. He held two jobs at the Fort Lauderdale airport, as a wheelchair attendant and in international arrivals customer support, and she worked in concessions. They saved painstakingly for a house, and bought one last year, where they are raising their three children, ages 7, 5 and 2. They were stunned when they both lost their jobs in March, and bereft.

Mr. Virgile’s wife wept at the prospect of having to ask the bank to put their mortgage payments on hold. Mr. Virgile is still trying to figure out how to apply for food stamps and unemployment benefits, and fears seeking out food banks because of possible virus exposure.

They had never before needed such assistance, and both, he said, are devastated.

“We’re not used to it,” Mr. Virgile said. “We knew before we got here that we had to work hard, very hard, to live the American dream. But we have to file unemployment. We have no choice. There’s nothing we can do.”

Christina Capecchi, Marina Trahan Martinez and Adam Popescu contributed reporting.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — Chemicals used to construct military missiles. Materials needed to build drones. Body armor for agents patrolling the southwest border. Equipment for natural disaster response.

A Korean War-era law called the Defense Production Act has been used to place hundreds of thousands of orders by President Trump and his administration to ensure the procurement of vital equipment, according to reports submitted to Congress and interviews with former government officials.

Yet as governors and members of Congress plead with the president to use the law to force the production of ventilators and other medical equipment to combat the coronavirus pandemic, he has for weeks treated it like a “break the glass” last resort, to be invoked only when all else fails.

“You know, we’re a country not based on nationalizing our business,” Mr. Trump said earlier this month. “Call a person over in Venezuela, ask them how did nationalization of their businesses work out? Not too well.”

The Defense Production Act includes a range of authorities including issuing loans to expand a vendor’s capacity, controlling the distribution of a company’s products and the more commonly used power of compelling companies to prioritize the government’s order over those of other clients.

The law’s frequent use, especially by the military to give its contract priority ratings to jump ahead of a vendor’s other clients, has prompted those most familiar with it to question why the administration has been so hesitant to tap it for a public health emergency that as of Tuesday has killed more than 3,600 Americans and sickened 181,000.

“What’s more important? Building an aircraft carrier or a frigate using priority ratings or saving a hundred thousand lives using priorities for ventilators?” said Larry Hall, who retired in August as the director of the Defense Production Act program division at the Federal Emergency Management Agency. “If we used the president’s logic, most of our economy is already nationalized. But it isn’t.”

On Friday, the president said he had finally pressed the law into action to force General Motors to step up efforts to manufacture ventilators. Then the federal authorities raided the home of a hoarder in Brooklyn and his warehouse in New Jersey, invoking the Defense Production Act to recoup tens of thousands of surgical masks.

Those actions could presage a wider use of the law now that Peter Navarro, the White House trade adviser, has been appointed the coordinator of Defense Production Act policy. The law gives the government the power to subpoena firms and force companies to fulfill the government’s contractual obligations before those of other clients. Mr. Navarro, who has in the past criticized multinational companies like General Motors and Walmart for cheating workers and sending jobs abroad, appears to relish his new role marshaling American industry.

But critics fear that weeks of dithering have already locked in deadly shortages at American hospitals.

Mr. Trump has “discretely, just in a discrete way, done something about ventilators. But there’s an overall appeal for him to do much, much more,” Speaker Nancy Pelosi said on Tuesday. “And this is nothing that can be handled piecemeal. It has to be across the board.”

Invoking the Defense Production Act is hardly a rare occurrence. As recently as last summer, the Department of Defense used it to obtain rare earth metals needed to build lasers, jet engines and armored vehicles.

The Defense Department estimates that it has used the law’s powers 300,000 times a year. The Department of Homeland Security — including its subsidiary, FEMA — placed more than 1,000 so-called rated orders in 2018, often for hurricane and other disaster response and recovery efforts, according to a report submitted to Congress in 2019 by a committee of federal agencies formed to plan for the effective use of the law.

The law, which was used frequently by previous administrations as well, does not permit the federal government to assert complete control over a company. The federal government can, however, use it to jump ahead of other clients or issue loans so a company can buy all of the supplies it needs to complete the government’s order by a specific date. A rarely used authority of the law also allows the administration to control the distribution of a company’s products and determine where such materials go.

The Pentagon has long been aggressive in its use of the law, inserting language from the wartime act into contracts to ensure delivery of products by a specific date.

For the coronavirus pandemic, Mr. Trump has elected to rely on the volunteerism of the private sector to obtain additional personal protective equipment, virus test kits and hospital equipment. He and his advisers have argued that using the act has been unnecessary, given the outpouring of support from large and small American companies — from Ford to MyPillow — that are retooling their factories to make masks, ventilators and gloves.

People familiar with the president’s thinking say he has been skeptical of using the law, seeing it as anti-American. But politics may have also influenced Mr. Trump’s decision. The president has repeatedly tried to deflect responsibility for the most significant crisis on American soil in decades. Using the Defense Production Act would make it clear that the government is in charge.

Many corporate executives have also lobbied the Trump administration against using the act, saying they fear that more government intervention and bureaucracy at a time of intense supply chain disruptions could do more harm than good.

“The Defense Production Act isn’t a magic wand,” said Neil Bradley, the executive vice president and chief policy officer at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.

“It can’t produce highly specialized manufacturing equipment overnight,” he added. “It can’t convert a refrigerator factory into a ventilator factory.”

The only company the administration has targeted with the law is General Motors. But more actions could come: Mr. Navarro said he anticipated frequently using the law to crack down on hoarding and price gouging, and he added that the government might also use the act to ensure resources are allocated to companies making protective equipment, medicines and other medical supplies.

“We won’t hesitate to use this where we need to,” he said.

So far, the administration has not been so decisive.

Peter T. Gaynor, the FEMA administrator, said on CNN last week that the administration would use the law to procure 60,000 coronavirus test kits, only to back off hours later.

With General Motors, it is unclear what the act accomplished. The company had already announced its intention to collaborate with the medical device firm Ventec Life Systems to produce ventilators.

After the president threatened on Friday to invoke the Defense Production Act against G.M., the automaker announced that the venture would aim to produce up to 10,000 ventilators a month.

Confused by the terms about coronavirus testing? Let us help:

“We cannot afford to lose hours in this crisis, much less days, in the production of ventilators,” Mr. Navarro said, adding that G.M. had been working too slowly.

While Mr. Trump has generally refrained from using the law, the recently passed economic stabilization package included $1 billion to take action under the Defense Production Act and ramp up purchases of necessary medical equipment, protective gear and medicines. 

Mr. Trump issued an executive order granting the Health and Human Services Department and other federal agency leaders the authority to use the act to compel companies to produce medical equipment. But the agencies have been ambiguous about their plans.

Lizzie Litzow, a spokeswoman for FEMA, said the agency was “in the process of reviewing” the authorities of the production act.

The Department of Health and Human Services did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

The law permits federal agencies to skip an often bureaucratic procurement process that can take months and force companies to come to the table to sign a contract. Given the speed of the crisis, Joshua Gotbaum, a former assistant secretary of defense for economic security, said the government did not have the luxury of normal bidding and contracting.

“Under the process of business as usual, they’re not even going to award contracts until this month or April, then there will be a protest,” he said. “Under the Defense Production Act, they could have sat down with people in February” and finalized a contract.

Previous administrations have also been hesitant to invoke the law for nonmilitary matters.

If the federal government used the law to make itself the priority, other clients that had worked through the company’s procurement process could have their orders delayed, though under the law, the vendor is protected from lawsuits.

“My general experience is when you’re in the midst of a national crisis, contractors generally speaking want to help,” said Ernest B. Abbott, who was the general counsel of FEMA during the Clinton administration. “They want to participate. They want to be able to keep their people employed to build what’s needed for the nation.”

But Mr. Hall, who in the months after Mr. Trump took office assisted Customs and Border Protection in using the law to secure body armor from Armor Express, a Michigan-based company, said such caution had allowed understanding of the law’s powers to atrophy.

“You have people on the civil side saying, ‘What is this thing? I might get in trouble using it,’” Mr. Hall said.

While FEMA and Health and Human Services have discussed the law in training situations, Mr. Hall said he often had to press his superiors to prepare for its use in the event of a national emergency, such as a pandemic.

“They had the authority to do this years ago,” Mr. Hall said. “They could have filled up the medical stockpile with priority ratings if they thought it was necessary.”

Maggie Haberman contributed reporting from New York, and Noah Weiland from Washington.

<|endoftext|>

Justin Penn, a Pittsburgh voter who calls himself politically independent, favored Joseph R. Biden Jr. in a matchup with President Trump until recently. But the president’s performance during the coronavirus outbreak has Mr. Penn reconsidering.

“I think he’s handled it pretty well,” he said of the president, whose daily White House appearances Mr. Penn catches on Facebook after returning from his job as a bank security guard. “I think he’s tried to keep people calm,” he said. “I know some people don’t think he’s taking it seriously, but I think he’s doing the best with the information he had.”

Although Mr. Penn, 40, said he did not vote for Mr. Trump, his opinion of the president has improved recently and he very well might back him for a second term.

Across the country, the coronavirus has sickened more than 150,000 people, cost millions their jobs and tanked the stock market. Yet the president’s approval ratings are as high as they have ever been, despite what most agree to be his slow performance dealing with the crisis, as well as his record of falsehoods about the virus, his propensity to push ideas and treatments that contradict expert advice, and his habit of lashing out at governors on the front lines. 

While public perceptions are fluid in a crisis, a notable twist in polling at this point is that independents are driving Mr. Trump’s bump in approval, and some increased Democratic support is a factor as well. Gallup called that “highly unusual for Trump” in reporting its latest survey, which was released last week and showed Mr. Trump’s approval rating at 49 percent, equal to the best of his presidency.

While Republicans’ views of Mr. Trump were flat — a sign they had already topped out — approval by independents rose by eight percentage points from early March, while Democratic approval was up by six percentage points.

Polling experts said that it was normal for the country to rally around a president during a national crisis, and that Mr. Trump’s dominance of the airwaves alone was enough to sway a slice of voters who don’t normally tune in to politics.

“There are people who haven’t even heard Trump that much, while the rest of us have been obsessed,” said Matt Grossmann, director of the Institute for Public Policy and Social Research at Michigan State University. “Those people are paying attention and seeing Trump a lot.”

Every modern president has seen their approval surge after significant national crises, although those bumps have diminished in size in recent administrations, as the country’s politics became more polarized. President Barack Obama gained just seven points after U.S. forces killed Osama bin Laden in 2011. The rally-round-the-flag effect is also often fleeting. President Jimmy Carter’s approval nearly doubled in 1979 when Iran seized American hostages, but as the crisis dragged on for more than a year, Mr. Carter’s approval plummeted and he lost re-election.

Interviews with about two dozen independent and Democratic voters, most of whom said they “somewhat disapproved” of Mr. Trump in a poll last year by The New York Times and Siena College, showed that some now expressed more positive views of him. Their numbers were small, consistent with what pollsters say is by historical standards a modest bump in approval for a commander in chief during an emergency.

Kathleen Mathien, an independent in Maricopa County, Ariz., said that she did not vote for Mr. Trump, but that her opinion of him had risen during his White House appearances to talk about the virus.

“He’s not one to be bullied,” she said, adding that she also saw flashes of empathy, a trait many critics find lacking in Mr. Trump.

Ms. Mathien, 64, a designer of cabinetry, explained that she doesn’t closely follow politics and finds it difficult to get a true understanding of candidates beyond the “smoke and mirrors” they project. “It’s so hard sometimes to vote if you don’t know who the real person is,” she said. Undecided as of now, she said Mr. Trump has a chance to win her vote.

Last week, a Monmouth University poll showed the president’s overall approval at 46 percent, an improvement driven in part by higher Democratic support. Patrick Murray, the director of the university’s Polling Institute, called the shift by some Democrats “microscopic in polling terms.”

“Any other president and we would expect those job ratings to swing by more than 10 points because of the situation,” Mr. Murray said.

Mr. Trump’s ratings lag far behind many of the nation’s governors, who have seen a sharp increase in their approval ratings as they rush to contain the virus. Unlike Mr. Trump’s, their approval ratings do not show the same level of partisan divide.

More than seven in 10 voters in states with a significant number of coronavirus cases gave their governor a positive review in the Monmouth survey. Even in states with the fewest reported cases, 61 percent of Americans said their governor was doing a good job.

Still, small shifts in Mr. Trump’s approval could make a difference in a close-fought general election. A Washington Post/ABC poll this past weekend showed Mr. Trump improving on a seven-point deficit against Mr. Biden a month ago to reach a near tie with the former vice president, 49 percent to 47 percent.

“President Trump has broken through the narrow range of 42 to 46 percent approval where he’s been for the last two years and indeed for much of his presidency,” said Whit Ayres, a Republican pollster. “It’s an open question whether those people who are changing now would actually vote in a different way in November. Some of the independents may. I doubt that many of the Democrats will.”

Anna Greenberg, a Democratic pollster, said, “I would be a little careful in whether it translates into something permanent,” adding, “The challenge for Trump is that he’s inconsistent.”

Robert Taylor, 31, a computer programmer in York County, Pa., wants Senator Bernie Sanders to be the Democratic nominee and is unsure if he will vote for Mr. Biden in a contest against the president.

“I’m not one of those people who hate Trump and thinks everything he’s done is wrong,” he said. He could vote for Mr. Trump if the president successfully leads the country through the coronavirus crisis, Mr. Taylor said. “We’ll see how he handles everything from here on out.”

Two months ago, Neil Ferguson of Earling, Iowa, stood in a corner for Senator Amy Klobuchar at Iowa’s Democratic caucuses. But he is displeased today by Democrats criticizing Mr. Trump’s leadership and wants the country to rally around the president at a time of national emergency.

“At some point we’ve got to get behind this together,” he said. “Every step of the way he’s criticized,” he said of the president. “I know a lot of voters out here that say yeah, had they given the guy a chance, maybe things would have been a lot better.”

Mr. Ferguson, 67, who is retired from the military, regularly watches the White House briefings, and though he sometimes winces over the president’s rambling delivery, he is impressed with Vice President Mike Pence and with Mr. Trump’s responses to reporters.

“When he gets to the question-and-answer period, he is pretty point-on,” he said. Four years ago Mr. Ferguson voted for a third-party candidate, but this year he has decided to vote for the president.

Among voters already supportive of Mr. Trump, recent polling shows their enthusiasm to support him in November is running well ahead of the enthusiasm of Biden backers. Janice Friedel, a professor in Des Moines and a Democrat, liked Mr. Trump before the virus hit, and now her support has grown stronger.

“I thought President Trump was doing OK, but this really has brought out his strong leadership, his ability to bring people together across the aisle,” she said. “I am a Democrat, but I am going to vote for him. I don’t see leadership on the Democratic side. But I certainly will vote for Trump.”

There are some Democrats and independents who were initially inclined to give the president the benefit of the doubt over the coronavirus, but have since concluded that he is failing.

“In the beginning, when he went on TV he sounded very presidential, sounded like he wanted to get in front of this,” said Francis Newberg of Delaware County, Pa. “I told my wife, ‘Listen to this guy, he sounds real.’”

But Mr. Newberg’s opinion swiftly went downhill as he watched the president attack Democratic governors and say that “everything is fine.”

“It’s not fine,” said Mr. Newberg, who lives with his wife outside Philadelphia in a community for residents over 62. Its three restaurants have closed and staff members now deliver three days of groceries at a time to residents.

“We had our first case of coronavirus diagnosed in our community,” said Mr. Newberg, who retired from a phone company. “There’s 1,800 of us. If it breaks out in here, there’s going to be a lot of boxes outside.”

In Florida, Jason Berger, an independent voter, told the Times/Siena poll last year that he strongly approved of the president. But Mr. Berger, a pharmacy technician, had an about-face as he watched Mr. Trump’s handling of the outbreak.

“The biggest pivot point for me was when he mentioned the cruise liner which held Americans, which he didn’t want to dock in California because he didn’t want the numbers to go up,” Mr. Berger said, referring to the Grand Princess cruise ship, which was held offshore with 21 infected people aboard in early March. “I found that extremely insulting. Those were Americans and they were sick.”

Four years ago, Mr. Berger, 46, did not vote in the presidential election, deciding to leave the outcome to voters who were more tuned in than he was at the time. He now regrets that decision. “I take full responsibility,” he said. He does not intend to sit out another race and will vote for the Democratic nominee in November.

“We need the government to take care of us in a crisis situation,” he said.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — The enormous hospital ship U.S.N.S. Comfort arrived in New York Harbor Monday morning, a gleaming white beacon of hope for a besieged city as it fights the novel coronavirus.

But in sending a Navy hospital ship to join the battle against a pandemic, military officials have taken a huge and calculated risk: Can a ship, the type of vessel where viruses have been shown to spread with frightening ease, actually remain safe from the infection raging just outside its berth at Pier 90 at Manhattan Cruise Terminal?

Navy officials do not plan to treat people with coronavirus aboard the Comfort. The mission is to take patients with other medical problems to relieve New York hospitals overrun by virus patients. But it is not as if the ship’s medical personnel can quarantine patients for two weeks before they accept them on board for treatment.

Navy officials, aware that all it would take is one positive case to turn the Comfort from rescue ship to floating petri dish, insist that they are doing everything short of Saran-wrapping the ship to try to keep it virus-free.

“We will establish a bubble around this ship to make sure we’re doing everything to keep it out,” Capt. Joseph O’Brien, commodore of Task Force New York City, said in an interview from the Comfort on Sunday.

That has meant almost sequestering the ship’s crew of 1,200 for the past two weeks to lessen their chances of contracting the virus, he said. The ship closed its workout rooms days ago, and the crew members have been practicing social distancing — at least, as much as they can in the confined quarters of a ship. Because the crew is composed of medically trained personnel, the learning curve on wiping down and disinfecting constantly is not as high as it might be.

But there remain challenges. Take President Trump’s visit on Saturday.

The president showed up to send off the Comfort in a show of national unity in a crisis. Normally, he and an entourage of staff members, reporters, handlers and photographers would have boarded the ship, and puffed up a few of those narrow staircases to see the bridge and tour an operating room. But not this time.

Neither Mr. Trump nor Defense Secretary Mark T. Esper, accompanying him, went aboard, and the president spoke from a lectern at the pier, with the ship behind him, then waved as it went out to sea. The fear of contaminating the hospital ship outweighed the benefits of a photo op.

“Bringing people onto a ship is inherently risky,” Capt. Patrick Amersbach, commanding officer of the medical personnel aboard the Comfort, said in a telephone interview from the ship. “So we have to be overly cautious.”

But within the striking white and red hull of the Comfort, some of the crew members say they are scared that they are tempting fate by dropping anchor in New York harbor. As of a week ago, the crew had not been informed of the screening procedures for patients coming aboard, other than temperature checks, according to one person aboard the Comfort familiar with the situation.

He added that there was some talk of conducting X-ray examinations — in an effort to check the lungs for evidence of the virus — but it is unclear if those are proceeding.

Navy officials acknowledge that it will be extremely difficult, yet paramount, to ensure no one with coronavirus gets on board. The ship’s crew will not be allowed off the ship; there will be no visits into Manhattan and of course no trips to bars or restaurants for takeout. Ship personnel will be doing temperature checks and scans and are still working on additional ways to screen patients before they are allowed on board, officials said.

With 12 operating rooms, 1,000 hospital beds, radiology services, a laboratory, pharmacy and CT scanner, the Comfort is its own fully-staffed hospital. It responded to the earthquake in Haiti in 2010, and showed up off the coast of New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina hit in 2005. It has even been to New York before, when, in the days after the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, the Comfort provided aid and medical help largely for emergency medical workers.

It floated in the Arabian Sea during the Iraq war in 2003, receiving and treating injured Marines and soldiers. Treating combat wounds is its main function. The ship, a refurbished oil tanker that was commissioned in 1987, has never before been involved in a response to an infectious disease pandemic, Captain Amersbach said.

But other military hospitals have seen their own share of sudden mysterious infectious diseases.

Lt. Gen. Ron Place, director of the Defense Health Agency, recalled that during the early stages of the Iraq war, from 2003 to 2005, Army medics suddenly started seeing pneumonia cases in “otherwise young, healthy, what-should-be low-risk service members.” Alarmed, the military started digging and realized that there was a new kind of bacteria in Iraq that American troops were not used to, and the exposure had led to complications.

“It was scary times for them, scary times for their families,” General Place said, before military medical officials finally came up with an antibiotic program that worked.

A command center at the Javits Center in Manhattan will dispatch non-coronavirus patients to the Comfort, officials said. There, the patients will be treated in the ship’s massive wards, where beds, some of them bunk beds, are placed together.

“Infection control will remain a formidable challenge,” said J. Stephen Morrison, director of the Global Health Policy Center at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, a policy research center in Washington.

But, he added, “the risks naval personnel are taking are certainly no higher than the risks faced by civilian medical personnel in NYC hospitals.”

Captain O’Brien, the Comfort commodore, said the deployment to New York feels different from other missions. “I’m from the Jersey Shore, so New York is a special place for me,” he said. “When it’s your own country, it’s a different thing completely.”

<|endoftext|>

The World Health Organization says that Chinese health officials in Wuhan revealed a “cluster of cases of pneumonia of unknown cause.”

The United States has its first confirmed case of coronavirus through travel: a man in Washington State.

The C.D.C. says that it has developed a sophisticated diagnostic test and has sought F.D.A. permission to send it to public labs around the country.

The White House announces a coronavirus task force led by the health secretary, Alex M. Azar II. President Trump attends the group’s first meeting and tweets that the experts “are on top of it.”

The Trump administration restricts travel from China, but exempts Americans and allows trade to continue. Mr. Azar declares a public health emergency.

Stanford University develops its own test for the coronavirus but runs into regulatory roadblocks at the F.D.A.

The F.D.A. approves the C.D.C. test, but the White House task force remains focused on the Diamond Princess cruise ship, which is placed under quarantine in Japan because 10 people on board are diagnosed with the coronavirus.

The C.D.C. publicly discloses that its test kits aren’t working properly amid complaints from labs around the country that screening has been far too restricted.

The C.D.C. announces that it will begin surveillance testing to track the virus. But a month later, it says it hopes to “begin rolling out” the program, which has yet to begin in a significant way.

The chief executive of the Association of Public Health Laboratories writes to the F.D.A. that “we are now many weeks into the response with still no diagnostic or surveillance test available outside of C.D.C. for the vast majority of our member laboratories.” Separately, the head of the C.D.C. boasts to Congress about his agency’s “aggressive response” to screening.

The F.D.A. relaxes its rules for some laboratories, allowing them to start testing before the agency has completed its approvals. At a White House news conference, Mr. Trump concedes there will be more cases, but says, “There’s no reason to panic at all.”

New York City reports its first case.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — On March 15, as economic devastation from the coronavirus showed no signs of abating, Jerome H. Powell, the Federal Reserve chair, aimed the full weight of the central bank against the problem.

He and his colleagues cut rates to near-zero in an emergency Sunday night move, while also rolling out a huge program to snap up government-backed debt and sweetening agreements meant to keep dollars available overseas.

It was not enough.

Markets plummeted the next morning, with panicked investors fearing that the Fed’s actions, which used almost every tool the central bank had at its unilateral disposal, would fail to stabilize the economy.

They clamored for Mr. Powell to turn on the central bank’s emergency lending authorities, through which it could soothe dysfunctional markets. But those programs, which were used in the 2008 financial crisis, had since become more difficult to activate. The 2010 Dodd-Frank law now required the Treasury secretary, Steven Mnuchin, to sign off on any Fed lending facility.

Mr. Powell’s relationship with Mr. Mnuchin — a comfortable friendship forged over weekly breakfasts and similar backgrounds in finance — suddenly morphed into a vital partnership.

Mr. Mnuchin, who had been in near-constant contact with Mr. Powell as markets bled, agreed that the Fed ought to use its emergency lending authorities. By the time the authorization forms arrived at the Treasury Department in search of Mr. Mnuchin’s signature, it was a formality.

On March 17, the Fed and the Treasury Department announced that Mr. Mnuchin’s department would back the first $10 billion in losses on a new emergency lending program, an intervention meant to keep short-term loans available to companies newly desperate for financing.

The coronavirus poses the most significant economic threat since at least 2008, thrusting Mr. Mnuchin and Mr. Powell into key roles in determining whether the United States economy suffers a short, manageable slowdown or enters a deep and painful recession.

The $2 trillion stimulus package that President Trump signed on Friday hands a huge pot of taxpayer money — $500 billion — to Mr. Mnuchin. The bulk of that will back the Fed’s emergency lending programs, which are aimed at ensuring that credit continues flowing, enabling businesses to stay afloat, workers to keep their jobs and the economy to snap back once the virus subsides, quarantines are lifted and American life restarts.

Economists are now predicting a severe slowdown, with growth contracting sharply and a rise in unemployment that could reach 15 percent by midyear. Mr. Mnuchin and Mr. Powell’s efforts are critical not only to workers and businesses but also to Mr. Trump, who has staked much of his reputation on a climbing stock market and robust economy, both of which are now threatened as he faces re-election.

“I wish we could have our old life back. We had the greatest economy that we’ve ever had,” Mr. Trump said at a White House briefing on Sunday. “We are bringing our economy back strong like it was before. It is even better than before. A lot of the money you read about, that’s all coming back.”

Mr. Mnuchin and Mr. Powell have been rapidly deploying resources to try to ensure that rebound happens. Mr. Mnuchin worked on details of the new legislation with Congress, pushing for money that could be used to aid companies big and small. Mr. Powell and other Fed officials, including Randal K. Quarles, the vice chair for supervision and regulation, talked with lawmakers about the Treasury Department funding to backstop the Fed’s programs.

Mr. Mnuchin now has enormous influence in doling out funds to hard-hit industries and small businesses, and the Fed’s emergency lending programs will be pumped up with a $454 billion taxpayer investment — enough to insure against losses on what could amount to more than $4 trillion in lending.

“It is shaping up as a power move with quite a bit of discretionary and open-ended decision making authority being consolidated within the Federal Reserve and the secretary of the Treasury,” said Sarah Bloom Raskin, a former governor of the Federal Reserve Board who was deputy Treasury secretary in the Obama administration.

Besides backstopping the Federal Reserve’s lending facilities, the Treasury Department is helping to manage a $350 billion fund that will provide grants and loans primarily to small businesses.

Mr. Mnuchin will have leeway over another $46 billion in industry-specific funds that Congress has appropriated to help the airline industry and companies involved in national security. He will be able to decide which businesses are worthy of loans and loan guarantees; when interest should be waived; when restrictions on corporate stock buybacks should be lifted; and whether or not to take an equity stake in a company in exchange for bailing it out.

In some ways, Mr. Mnuchin and Mr. Powell are odd candidates to shoulder such vast responsibility. They are both financial deal makers by trade, not experts in economic crises. Nor do they have Washington’s unbending confidence: Mr. Powell has been the subject of two years of steady criticism from Mr. Trump, who has likened his Fed chair to an “enemy” and a bad golfer, while Mr. Mnuchin has drawn the skepticism of Congress for refusing to release the president’s tax returns.

At times Mr. Mnuchin, who advised Mr. Trump to tap Mr. Powell, has tried to thaw the relationship between the Fed chair and the president. In February 2019, Mr. Mnuchin facilitated a casual dinner with Mr. Trump, Mr. Powell and himself at the White House residence, where they discussed the economy, golf and the Super Bowl.

The power that Mr. Powell and Mr. Mnuchin have amassed is prompting concerns among some members of Congress and financial reform groups. Some Democrats have worried that the Fed will be able to dole out loans with few limitations. And while the $46 billion that Mr. Mnuchin oversees directly will be subject to examination by an inspector general, Mr. Trump has already suggested he could impede the integrity of that position by determining what information is shared with Congress.

On Monday, Mr. Mnuchin said in an interview on the Fox Business Network that the Treasury Department would soon roll out new rules that would allow small-business owners to start applying for and receiving loans on Friday.

Mr. Mnuchin, whose department was already short-staffed, is recruiting additional people from across the government to help manage the new programs and is placing greater responsibility on his deputy, Justin Muzinich, to oversee the bailout money.

The Fed, which has been monitoring the economic fallout of the virus since January, has tried to keep money flowing to both households and businesses by rolling out additional emergency lending programs. Some smooth over the municipal bond market by accepting local debt — which is issued to build roads and finance schools — as collateral. One will buy newly issued corporate bonds from highly rated companies or make loans to those firms — something the Fed has never tried before.

“The Fed is performing a critical function,” said Ben S. Bernanke, the former Fed chair. It “has done a really good job of rolling this out quickly.”

The new legislation will allow the central bank to grow the size and scope of its programs and potentially push its boundaries even further. It funnels hundreds of billions into the Treasury Department’s Exchange Stabilization Fund that can be deployed to cover potential losses on the Fed’s loans to businesses, states and municipalities. Legislators have particularly urged the Fed to do more for local governments, something it has shied away from in the past but is now contemplating.

“I know of no other time that a legislature has delegated to a central bank such far-reaching authority to allocate credit,” Kathryn Judge, a professor at Columbia Law School and an expert on financial regulation, said of the program.

The Treasury Department signs off on emergency lending programs and has input on their goals, but the Fed has historically worked out the gritty details and handled implementation, sometimes with the help of outside firms. For instance, a subsidiary of BlackRock, the world’s largest asset manager, is setting up the Fed’s corporate bond buying.

The programs are governed by some rules: They must benefit broad groups, and the Fed will answer to lawmakers for its actions. Businesses that get direct loans backed by the new funding cannot make new plans to buy back stock for a year after the loan is outstanding, though Mr. Mnuchin can waive that provision.

Mr. Mnuchin’s moves will also be watched: The inspector general installed at the Treasury Department will be tasked with monitoring how its loans are used, and a bipartisan congressional oversight panel will be set up to foster accountability.

But some Democrats and financial watchdogs have expressed discomfort at concentrating so much power in the hands of so few people, warning that the lending programs might put the needs of big corporations over workers.

“They can actually lay off workers while receiving public assistance,” Marcus Stanley, the policy director of Americans for Financial Reform, said on Twitter, referring to the Fed’s programs. “Not only that, but the door is open for big corporations to benefit from government cash while turning right around and paying that cash out to wealthy shareholders and executives, at the same time as they lay off workers.”

They have also questioned the integrity of the oversight process. Mr. Trump will appoint the new inspector general, and on Friday, he released a signing statement suggesting he had the power to decide what information the official could share with Congress.

On Sunday, Mr. Mnuchin pledged full transparency about the money but demurred about the role of the inspector general.

“There’s constitutional issues,” he said on “Fox News Sunday.” “I’m going to leave that to the lawyers and to Congress to figure out.”

Neil M. Barofsky, who was the first special inspector general of the Troubled Asset Relief Program, the $700 billion bailout for banks, said that Mr. Trump’s suggestion that the new official could be gagged might have a chilling effect.

“It’s concerning,” Mr. Barofsky said, noting that he successfully employed the threat of notifying Congress in that role. “It might embolden other agencies to simply refuse requests for information.”

Mr. Mnuchin has been given up to $100 million to hire private sector firms and individuals to assist in development and execution of the programs. Some Democrats have derided that money as a “slush fund” and warned Mr. Mnuchin against using it to benefit his finance friends.

Mr. Mnuchin has already spoken to executives at his former firm, Goldman Sachs, about potentially getting involved, according to a person familiar with the matter. He has also been consulting regularly with Henry M. Paulson Jr., the former Treasury secretary, and Stephen A. Schwarzman, the chief executive of The Blackstone Group, a private equity firm, about the financial crisis-era powers that he will need to employ and the goal of reopening parts of the economy.

At a news conference on Friday evening, Mr. Trump said that prominent Wall Street executives would be deeply involved in negotiating the terms of bailouts for companies like airlines. He specifically mentioned Laurence D. Fink, the chief executive of BlackRock, and said that Mr. Mnuchin was recruiting other “brilliant people” from Wall Street.

The president said that he expected the Wall Street executives would take little pay for their work.

“Peanuts, they want compared to what they normally get,” he said.

<|endoftext|>

Soon after President Trump first uttered the phrase “Chinese virus,” Representative Grace Meng got a call from her parents, who had read about it in the newspaper. Had Mr. Trump, they wondered, really given the coronavirus that corrosive moniker?

Yes, she told them, indeed he had. And no, despite being a member of Congress and her parents’ continued pleas, there was nothing she could do to make him stop.

“I have, at times, felt helpless,” said Ms. Meng, a Democrat from New York whose large and multicultural district encompasses many neighborhoods in Queens, including Flushing. “Hearing stories consistently from around the world where people are being harassed and assaulted really reminds me that often times we are, as a community, still viewed as outsiders.”

After enduring decades of exclusion, racism and discrimination that include some of the darkest chapters of American history, Asian-Americans entered 2020 with reason for optimism on the political front. A wave of second-generation Asian-Americans had come of age, sparking hope that they could help break voter turnout records in the fall. And three people with roots in the diaspora had run for the country’s highest office during the same cycle, with one of them, Andrew Yang, energizing Asian-American voters in a fashion seldom seen before.

And then along came the coronavirus — a pandemic that unleashed a torrent of hate and violence as bigots blamed Asian-Americans for the outbreak. In recent weeks, they have been yelled at, spit on, physically attacked and more, leading at least three organizations to begin tracking the episodes. Hundreds of people have filed reports, the groups say, though an untold number of incidents have most likely gone uncounted as victims have chosen to keep quiet.

In interviews, a dozen Asian-American politicians, academics and leaders of nonprofit groups denounced the racial animus that has shown itself during the crisis, vowing to speak out against it and to protect their community even as they personally acknowledged feeling angry, fearful and unsettled.

transcript

Jiayang, do you remember the first time that you started thinking about the backlash in this country against Asian-Americans in response to the coronavirus?

Yeah, I mean, around, I guess, this is the beginning of March. I had seen on Instagram a friend and a fellow writer documenting an incident in Manhattan, where — I think he is Korean-American, and he was told by a stranger to get away. But I remember reading about that incident and thinking, “yeah, I mean, that’s really terrible that this has happened,” but wondering, is this a singular incident, or is there a trend?

As a journalist and perhaps by my own personal temperament, I’m pretty cautious. I don’t like to make sensational generalizations that go well on a headline. I feel like I need very convincing proof that something is happening before I call it. And especially as a Chinese-American, I wanted to make sure that I was not crying racism before I had the full evidence. I wonder if it’s because if I don’t make too big a deal out of it, it won’t be fully real.

From The New York Times, I’m Michael Barbaro. This is “The Daily.”

I get to the gate at LAX.

Home Depot.

In an Uber Pool.

A grocery store, Wegmans.

We were walking from the gym to get in our classrooms.

I got some milk, a little pasta. Most everything’s gone.

And at that moment, there was this guy, looked like a regular guy. He was staring at me.

As the death toll from the coronavirus rises in the U.S., so do reports of verbal and physical attacks against Asian-Americans —

And a couple of seats away from me, a man was seated. And presumably his wife comes back to sit down and says out loud —

“You people you, brought it. You’re sick.”

“Fuck China.”

“China is stupid.”

“I ought to kill you. I ought to shoot you.”

“This girl looks Chinese. She must have the virus. I can’t sit next to her.”

— Who say that they are being blamed for the pandemic.

A person at the White House used the term “kung-flu.” My question is, do you think that’s wrong?

Kung-flu?

Kung-flu. And do you think using the term “Chinese virus,” that puts Asian-Americans at risk, that people might target them?

No, not at all. No, not at all. I think they probably would agree with it 100%. It comes from China. There’s nothing not to agree with. I’ll have the last question.

Today —

When the president asked, I don’t think they would mind it being called the Chinese virus, I mind!

It did make me feel different, and didn’t really want to be Chinese because of the coronavirus.

Jiayang Fan, a writer for The New Yorker magazine, shares her story.

It’s Friday, April 10th.

Jiayang, can you tell me a little bit about your childhood? Where did you grow up?

I was born in 1984 in Chongqing, China. My mom was a doctor. My dad was a researcher. And he was one of the first batch of scholars sent to the U.S. to bring Western knowledge and technology back to China. So he leaves when I’m about two, so I have very little memory of him. But for my mom and I, life in China feels very serene and comfortable.



Whatever sense I have of the outside world, the world beyond China, is very, very vague and incredibly hazy, like I’m not quite sure it exists. But I think if one place were to stand out, it would be the United States.

I remember my mom and her friends talking about the show Dynasty, which did telegraph the glamor of the U.S.

I like that one. It’s a rather expensive fur. I like the mink. That is mink?

The sense that this is what an everyday Joe would inhabit.

And this of course, is a soap opera about an incredibly wealthy oil family living in a crazy gorgeous home, and driving along oil fields. So it’s actually quite exceptional.

My name happens to be Mrs. Steven Carrington. I’m not used to haggling over what suits me, or what it costs.

Well, it was the show, and it was also at the time in China what was very popular were these calendars of American families, where every member had golden hair, sparkling blue eyes and perfect bone structure, and they were always smiling with their perfect white teeth. They always were sitting by a perfect colonial house, or just out in nature, but in front of a park that they looked like they owned.

 And I remember the food that really encapsulated America to me were Cheerios.

Cheerios?

It’s the big yellow box that everyone knows.

Yes, Cheerios. I had no idea what they tasted like, but the company did fantastic branding in China.

Cheerios number one. We love it! Toasty oat goodness.

I remember the picture of the perfect baby on these ads for Cheerios. You know, the round cheeks, the blue eyes. That baby got to have this superior breakfast food that I, in all likelihood, would never get to taste.

Cheerios number one!

So there’s me, drinking my Chinese porridge, and eating my pickled vegetables, and having fantasies about Cheerios, which I learned years later to not be very tasty at all there. They’re actually tasteless.

To be like the definition of blandness, but in your mind, they are this superior food for this blond haired, perfect group of people.

Yeah, for superior people, to put it bluntly.

I mean, I still remember actually the first time I heard English. I think it might have been my fifth or sixth birthday, and my mom might have come back pretty recently from English language training sessions. And she just said the words “happy birthday.”

That was astounding to me. It was like my mom was superwoman, that she knew how to say this language that did not sound like a language to me. “Happy birthday.” I still remember the way the syllables came out of her mouth, and the image, which was of a tsunami.

There was this tidal wave of one syllable consuming the next one that, to me, was very incomprehensible. And I remember at the time thinking, “I will never learn this language. I have no hopes of ever learning this language.” Which is probably OK, because I only need one language, right? And it’s Chinese.

Oh.



But essentially something happens in the June of ‘89 that changes my father’s fate as well as that of my mom and I forever.

The noise of gunfire rose from all over the center of Peking.

The Tiananmen massacre.

There’s a mood of terror in the center of the city and quiet —

So the U.S. government immediately makes provisions for Chinese scholars, who might need to flee from China.

The demonstrators in Tiananmen Square —

And that was when my mother and I joined my father in the U.S.



What do you remember about first arriving in the U.S.?

We land in J.F.K., and my father is living at the time in New Haven, Connecticut. And that drive from J.F.K. to New Haven, it is gray and drab, like tones that are not at all what I had imagined. So I keep waiting for the real America to reveal itself to me. So it is a rude awakening when my dad leads us to his second floor studio. There’s just a mattress on the floor, and I think it takes me a good minute to realize that this is my new home. And the loss of a language is pretty traumatic for me.

How so?

School started a few months later, and I could not understand my teachers, my classmates. And repeatedly my new American teachers ask me, why aren’t you talking more? Why aren’t you engaging? And those expectations, I think, are hard for me to fully understand. And I feel like I’m walking blind into a game, where I don’t know the rules.

Mm-hm.

I mean, not only do I not speak the language, I’m bringing pickled fish and rice, and that’s not sitting well with the other kids at a lunch table. All I feel is defeat.

Hm. It sounds very lonely.

Yeah, retrospectively, I think what made me feel most lonely was that I couldn’t share those feelings with my mother. And I think for my mother, who worked very low paying menial labor jobs in the U.S., a drastic step down from her position as a doctor in China, she must have felt as marginalized and as embarrassed by her immigrant status as I do, but in an adult way, but similarly lacking in an emotional vocabulary to express those feelings.

What do you mean?

Like, I remember going to the mall for the first time with my mother. And my mom’s favorite pastime was window shopping, just looking at things that she couldn’t afford. And I remember one time someone trying to hand her maybe a flyer for some store, and she said, no, thanks. But she couldn’t pronounce it correctly, so this young man said “No sex? Did you say no sex? No sex?” And I think I was like 11 or 12 at the time. I remember that my mother actually just in this embarrassed way laughed, like out of anxiety, like she wanted it to be OK. She wanted to respond in a way to indicate that she was not offended. But I remember the way that my cheek just felt hot and red, they grew, and how I felt so humiliated on my mother’s behalf. And that experience feels seared into my brain, not just because of the insult, but because my mother had to swallow her own humiliation.

Did you understand, given your age, that this was racism? I mean, how did you process it in that moment?

I think I turned over the incident in my mind for a long time after that. I don’t think I would have coded it as racism. I think I almost only understood racism as something that white people inflicted on black people. I had no idea — or I had very little idea of how Asians fit into the landscape of race in the U.S. And I didn’t know how to understand incidents in which you were not called a very specific racial slur. Like that “no thanks, no sex?” Like —

What was that?

What was that? Exactly. I think as an 11-year-old, in my head, I didn’t want to be different. I didn’t want to be the one lashing out at others for being racist because inevitably that would make me seem even more different. And I think my mother, my mother was the closest person in my life. But if she had a religion, it would be survival. I learned from my mother not to rock the boat, not to shake the existing system, to basically understand how the existing system works, and then to ascend it in some way, to climb the ladder. As long as you fit in better, you will live a more comfortable life here. And that should be the goal.

And did things start to get a little bit better, eventually?

I start speaking better English. I start really enjoying and then falling in love with the English language, something that I thought would never happen. That’s really important for me, I have to admit. When that language, English, came to feel like a part of my body, I have to say that felt like a homecoming to me.

Hm. And how old are you at this point, where you’re starting to fall in love with the language?

I think around maybe 12 or 13.

Mm-hm.

And I’ll never forget the first time in sixth grade, when I said the phrase “come on.” Like, this sounds silly, but it was only sixth grade when I could comfortably say “come on” to a schoolmate, and I felt very triumphant.

As if to say, “enough of that, come on.”

Exactly. When I could say that, I was so aware of myself saying it, and I was saying it the way that a normal American speaker would say it. And I’ll never forget the sense of pride that coursed through me. And there was no one I could celebrate it with, right? Because imagine if then I turned to the classmate who I said “come on” with and said, “did you hear me? I just said come on!”

 That would have totally defeated its purpose, but I remember it, because it felt like a real Americanism. And it just rolled off my tongue.

So in that moment, you finally feel like you belong.

Exactly. But I still see myself predominantly as a visitor, and that my existence is pretty probational on good behavior. And if I behave well, I will be able to minimize the number of times that I stick out as someone who doesn’t belong.

But then I started to realize, that’s not exactly how it works.

We’ll be right back.

So, Jiayang, I wonder if you can tell me about what happened to you recently.

So this was in mid-March, when there were rumors that New York City would be put under lockdown because of coronavirus. And I wanted to make sure I had enough food in the house, if I had to stay in for an indefinite period of time.

Mm-hm.

And I was also really worried about my mother, who has a neurodegenerative disease and lives in a nursing home close by. I knew that I wouldn’t be able to see her for a while, and I had several errands lined up. One was to take out the trash. One was to mail my rent check. And one was to go a few blocks away to my neighbor’s house, to pick up a sack of rice.

It was around evening time, and I had just left my apartment building, and I was on the phone, talking to my mother’s health aide in Chinese. And as I was turning around after putting the trash in the trash bin — this is right in front of my apartment. I heard “Chinese, Chinese, Chinese bitch. Fucking Chinese.” But it all — I don’t think I fully believed what I was hearing. And when I made eye contact with him, he kept speaking. “You’re fucking Chinese.” And I realized that that I was comprehending that what he was saying did not stop him.

Mm-hm.

That was when in my ear, my mom’s aide paused and said, “Are you OK? Is something happening?” And I couldn’t really speak. I found myself walking down the street. I think I was still really set on, “I need to get rice,” but then I found it really hard to continue walking, because my legs just felt leaden. Like, I really, really wanted to continue walking. It would have only been a 10 minute walk away for me to fetch that rice, but I found myself coming to a halt. And even, I thought, if I just kept talking on the phone with my aide, but then I thought, “I’m talking in Chinese. Who else am I going to offend?” And then I just got off the phone. And once I got off the phone, I felt even more scared, because I was so aware of being alone.

So this is not embarrassment or even shame in this moment. This is just terror.

This is a very real sense of fright that I’m not going to make it to my friend’s house to get my sack of rice.

Jiayang, we started this conversation with you saying that your instinct, and maybe it’s because you’re a journalist, maybe it’s as an Asian-American, maybe it’s both, is to minimize these incidents, and to be slow to see them as part of a larger phenomenon. But it sounds like this was different for you. Am I right to think that?

Yeah, I mean, this is not the first time I’ve been called a Chinese bitch. But what was different about this incident was that this man seemed to really mean it. And I wondered.

I mean, in retrospect, right, I wondered at the relationship between the sense of conviction in the man’s voice, his certainty that he was in the right to point out my Chineseness and to call me a Chinese bitch.

Mm-hm.

And I think about the things that were going on in his day, like did he lose his job earlier in the day because of this virus? I mean, does he work in the service industry? Does he have a loved one who has also become a prisoner in a nursing home or hospital? And I think about the way that all those anxieties, and rage and sadness, might have hardened into something like an instrument, almost a weapon.

Hm.

And I think about me being a surface onto which he could use that weapon and lash out.

Hm.

And I think about the probational nature of my Chinese-American existence, in a sense that, in better times, in normal times, there are certain stereotypes that are cast upon me when I walk down the street. But in a moment of crisis, when it seems plausible that the country where I was born could be responsible for an unprecedented pandemic, that I become a person of suspicion, and I become someone who is quite easy perhaps to target all your ire and anxieties, and that maybe it gave him temporary relief to be able to identify someone or something as the cause for his hurt and for his anxieties.

So what do you do?

So I go home, double lock my door, pull out my phone and get on Twitter.



OK, yes. I describe what happened, and I tweet. I wasn’t offended. I was afraid. I was worried he knew where I lived. For the longest time, I’ve been telling friends in China that although racism against Chinese exists in this country, that’s not what I feel in a pandemic. I’ve never felt like this in my 27 years in this country. I’ve never felt afraid to leave my home to take out the trash because of my face.

I want to believe what happened is anomalous, and that we’re living in extraordinary times, and fear can deform us. I wonder now if I should have taken his picture.

I wonder what your mother would make of this incident. And I wonder what she would think of the fact that you decided to share what happened to you so publicly.

I think if I were to tell her about the experience, she might not fully understand the import of it. She would say, “Well, were you hurt?” And I would say, “No.” And she would say, “Well, did you lose anything?” And I would say, “No.” And she would say, “Do you feel like this man is going to cut you down and kill you now?” And I would say, “Probably not, no.” And she would say, “Well, why are you even telling me this? What is the big deal here?”

Hm.

Or if I were to tell her that I was having this conversation with you, she would say “Why make something out of nothing?” Right? She would say, “Why are you crying victim here? Why are you making this into a bigger deal than it really is? Do you want this to be how you’re remembered, for being that woman who was the victim of a non-incident?”

And what would you say in this imaginary conversation with your mother?

I think I would try in English, because I think it would be hard for me to find the words in Chinese to explain the significance of it, not on my physical well-being.

Help me understand what you mean.

Because for the longest — I mean, I think my mom and I both lived with this fiction that if we could be perfect versions of ourselves, for example, if my mother could pronounce “thanks” the way that it’s supposed to be pronounced, and for me, if I could say “come on” naturally, that had always been the goal of our American existence, was to somehow bend ourselves to a shape that America could accept. I never dared to believe that I could actually help to make America better. That was something I never dared to think was possible. But in experiencing this, it made me rethink my role as an American and how even me, even someone who is probationary, that I was in some very, very small way contributing to this country by pointing out the ways that it’s failing itself, making clear the way in which this country still makes me feel ashamed, is possibly one way in which I can make it better.

Hm.

And also, that’s the best version of America. Like in all the conceptions of America that exist in my head, I actually think this ability to call out the worst parts of America to itself, my freedom to do so, this feels to me the most miraculous part of America.

But I think all of that would be, frankly, a bit too abstract to my mother. I think her quest for survival has been so concrete and lived, I’ll never be able to repay her for the way that her very concrete existence has paved the way for my more luxuriantly abstract one, but that maybe that’s a boundary between us that I’ve been able to cross, and that no matter how many ways I try to explain it in what language, if she’ll fully understand. But I really needed to make sure that, for my own sake, I could know that this did happen, that this was not a figment of my imagination, or that in an hour’s time, or in 12 hours’ time, I would try to minimize it in my own mind.

Thank you very much for your time. We really appreciate it, Jiayang.

Thank you so much for having me.

I’m so sorry that you had the experience you had.

I am, too. But I’m sure it will be a small experience in what is hopefully a very long and a much bigger one of living in America and being American.



We’ll be right back.

Here’s what else you need to know today.

Majority leader.

Our nation continues to battle the coronavirus pandemic. More than 400,000 Americans have tested positive. Nearly 15,000 have lost their lives. And important public health measures are creating an economic catastrophe.

On Thursday, the Labor Department said that another 6.6 million Americans filed for unemployment benefits in the past week.

That means. Mr. President, more than 16 million Americans have lost their jobs in only the last three weeks, a tragedy that is hard to even comprehend.

Economists now believe that the U.S. unemployment rate is the worst since the Great Depression. The latest figures put even deeper pressure on Congress to adopt a new round of economic relief for workers. But on Thursday, that legislation hit a roadblock in the Senate. Democrats want to double the size of the bill by adding hundreds of billions of dollars for hospitals and local governments, which are facing major financial shortfalls.

We don’t have to divide along the usual lines so soon after we came together for the country. To my Democratic colleagues, please, please do not block emergency aid you do not even oppose just because you want something more.

But Republicans, led by Senate Majority leader Mitch McConnell, say that money can wait.

Let’s continue to work together with speed and bipartisanship. We will get through this crisis together.

“The Daily” is made by Theo Balcomb, Andy Mills, Lisa Tobin, Rachel Quester, Lynsea Garrison, Annie Brown, Clare Toeniskoetter, Paige Cowett, Michael Simon Johnson, Brad Fisher, Larissa Anderson, Wendy Dorr, Chris Wood, Jessica Cheung, Stella Tan, Alexandra Leigh Young, Jonathan Wolfe, Lisa Chow, Eric Krupke, Marc Georges, Luke Vander Ploeg, Adizah Eghan, Kelly Prime, Julia Longoria, Sindhu Gnanasambandan, Jazmin Aguilera, M.J. Davis Lin, Austin Mitchell, Sayre Quevedo, Neena Pathak, Dan Powell, Dave Shaw, Sydney Harper, Daniel Guillemette, Hans Buetow, Robert Jimison, Mike Benoit and Bianca Giaever. Special thanks to Sam Dolnick, Mikayla Bouchard, Lauren Jackson, Julia Simon, Nora Keller, Mahima Chablani, Sabrina Tavernise, Yowei Shaw and Adriana Balsamo.

That’s it for “The Daily.” I’m Michael Barbaro. See you on Monday.

“They are doing this because they have certain political motives and they are not taking into account the effect of their actions on other huge groups of people, including Asian-Americans,” Representative Judy Chu, Democrat of California, said of her Republican counterparts in Congress and the White House. “I hope this wakes people up.”

Some of those interviewed expressed cautious hope that the events of the past several weeks might unite the sprawling and diverse Asian-American community in a productive way that could build on the political momentum that has been bubbling in recent years.

But they also spoke of a profound sadness; despite a long struggle for hard-won educational, economic and political gains, the xenophobic attacks and political rhetoric of the last month have served as a reminder that, especially under Mr. Trump, Asian-Americans may never fully be able to shake the feeling that they are perpetual foreigners.

“These stereotypes have been here for decades,” Ms. Chu said. “They’re always kind of underneath the surface. But if there’s some precipitating event, then it can bring it all back out.”

Mr. Yang put it bluntly: “People around the country all of a sudden are being targeted in ways they’ve never experienced before. It’s very depressing.”

The racist abuse on display has evoked painful memories. Asian-American leaders were quick to recall the government-sponsored discrimination baked into the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 and Japanese internment in the 1940s. Experts say those events and others contributed to the perpetual foreigner and “Yellow Peril” myths that promoted the false ideas that people with Asian features were disease carriers, a threat to the nation and could never truly become American.

In other words, said Janelle Wong, a professor of American studies at the University of Maryland, College Park, “You still are assumed to eat bat soup.”

For other leaders, it was the 1982 slaying of Vincent Chin — who was beaten to death in Detroit by two autoworkers in the midst of a recession — that came to mind.

And still others said the current situation contained strong echoes of the period after Sept. 11, 2001, when “anyone who was brown was equated with being a terrorist,” said Karthick Ramakrishnan, a professor of political science at the University of California, Riverside.

“I was really fearful back in those days that they were going start rounding up Muslims the way they did with my grandparents and my parents,” said Mark Takano, a Japanese-American congressman from Riverside, Calif., whose father still has scars on his legs from internment. “We as Asian-Americans know that in times like these, mass blame and mass guilt gets assigned to a group of people.”

That the situation hits so close to home has made the messaging coming from Mr. Trump and some Republicans all the more frustrating to Democratic lawmakers like Mr. Takano, Ms. Chu and Ms. Meng, whose complaints have been backed by Speaker Nancy Pelosi.

For days, Mr. Trump insisted on calling the virus that causes Covid-19 the “Chinese virus” — a term he initially defended as “not racist at all” because, he said, the virus “comes from China.”

Some of Mr. Trump’s advisers and allies, like Kellyanne Conway, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, have similarly argued for the use of the phrase, citing both the virus’s origin and a desire to hold the Chinese government accountable for its slow public acknowledgment of the extent of the crisis.

Those talking points were subsequently picked up by some corners of conservative media and by Republican lawmakers like Representative Kevin McCarthy of California, the House minority leader, and Senator Charles E. Grassley of Iowa, who repeated the “Chinese virus” language publicly.

Historians, public health experts and groups including the World Health Organization have recommended against assigning names to infectious diseases that include a geographic location and have emphasized that associating them with an ethnic group can lead to discrimination and xenophobia.

Asian-American leaders in particular have sounded the alarm about Republican messaging that they say stigmatizes their community and fans racism. Ms. Chu, who is chairwoman of the Congressional Asian Pacific American Caucus, sent a letter to her colleagues last month urging them not to spread misconceptions. Mr. Takano said he personally spoke to Mr. McCarthy and asked him to stop using the term “Chinese coronavirus.” And Ms. Meng recently introduced a resolution condemning anti-Asian sentiment connected to the virus.

Amid the outcry, Mr. Trump eventually stopped using the phrase and said publicly that it was “very important that we totally protect our Asian-American community in the United States” adding that the virus was “NOT their fault in any way.”

Democratic lawmakers said his statements came too late, and experts noted that even in walking back his use of the phrase, Mr. Trump had referred to Asian-Americans using language that reinforced the idea that they are an “other.” “They are working closely with us to get rid of it,” Mr. Trump tweeted.

The criticism from Asian-American lawmakers in Congress has fallen along party lines in part because there are no Republican Asian-American or Pacific-Islander members of Congress aside from Aumua Amata Coleman Radewagen, the nonvoting delegate who represents American Samoa.

Young Kim, a former state assemblywoman who is one of several Asian-American Republicans currently running for Congress, appeared to distance herself from Mr. Trump’s “Chinese virus” rhetoric.

“This virus is not spread by any one group and does not discriminate based on gender, ethnicity, race, or social class. It affects everyone,” she said in a statement. “Now is not the time for division, labeling, or name calling.”

Dan Hom, who chairs the advisory board of the Asian Business Association of San Diego, said he found the racist acts targeting Asian-Americans “inexcusable,” but added that he supported Mr. Trump’s handling of the crisis.

“I believe the president is holding China accountable,” Mr. Hom, a Republican, said. “If you start with the premise that the president’s a racist, then anything he says or he does, you’re going to say he’s a racist.”

Mr. Yang, the former presidential candidate who largely sought to avoid attacking Mr. Trump during his campaign, said he saw the president’s language as an attempt “to distract from his administration’s slow response to the coronavirus” and was disheartened by his decision to inflame hostilities.

Mr. Yang said that over the past several weeks, he, too, had experienced sudden moments of self-consciousness while in public. And he had been acutely reminded of the sadness and anger he felt as a child when he was one of only a few Asian-Americans at his school.

“It’s been a real uphill battle over my lifetime and it feels like we’ve made really dramatic progress,” he said. “And then it feels like we’re being sent backward in various ways — and that’s painful.”

Ms. Meng expressed similar sentiments, saying that for perhaps the first extended period in her life, she could not be sure “how someone will react to me at any given time.”

“You finally have that feeling like, ‘Oh, we’ve made it.’ My parents’ generation — that first generation of immigrants — their sacrifices were worth it. We are now accepted,” she said. “For this to happen brings up these feelings that I always assumed were part of people’s history. They are now something we have to deal with.”

<|endoftext|>

MIAMI — Before the Rev. Rodney Howard-Browne, the pastor of a Pentecostal megachurch in Florida, held two church services on Sunday — each filled with hundreds of parishioners — lawyers from the sheriff’s office and local government pleaded with him to reconsider putting his congregation in danger of contracting the coronavirus.

The pastor ignored them, proceeding with the services at the River at Tampa Bay Church and even providing bus transportation for members who needed a ride.

On Monday, Sheriff Chad Chronister of Hillsborough County said he had obtained an arrest warrant for Mr. Howard-Browne for “intentionally and repeatedly” defying emergency orders mandating that people maintain social distance and stay at home.

“His reckless disregard for human life put hundreds of people in his congregation at risk and thousands of residents who may interact with them this week in danger,” Sheriff Chronister, who is a Republican, said at a news conference in Tampa. “Our goal here is not to stop anyone from worshiping, but the safety and well-being of our community must always come first.”

Mr. Howard-Browne, 58, who lives in Hernando County, turned himself in on Monday afternoon. He was booked in jail and freed 40 minutes later after posting a $500 bail. He faces two second-degree misdemeanor charges of unlawful assembly and violation of public health emergency rules.

Florida is the second-largest state in the country, after Texas, with no statewide order requiring people to stay at home, leaving in place a hodgepodge of restrictions that have allowed many Floridians to maintain a semblance of normal life. Local authorities have frequently cited the lack of a state mandate as reason to urge — rather than require — residents to take precautions. The coronavirus poses a unique threat to the state, with its large older population and millions of visitors.

Gov. Ron DeSantis, a Republican, said on Monday that he would sign an order codifying local rules urging people to remain indoors, but only in Southeast Florida, from Key West to West Palm Beach, the most densely populated stretch of the state where many restrictions were already in place. The region accounts for about 60 percent of Florida’s more than 5,700 coronavirus cases, Mr. DeSantis said.

He has blamed some of the contagion on travelers from New York and Louisiana fleeing hot zones there and ordered those visitors to quarantine. Florida has closed restaurants except for takeout and delivery, urged people 65 or older to stay home, suspended vacation rentals and taken other steps, but it has not ordered a statewide shutdown of nonessential businesses or beaches.

The editorial boards of local newspapers have clamored for the governor to take bolder action. Physicians in Southwest Florida who are worried about hospitals becoming overwhelmed have asked Collier and Lee Counties, home to Naples and Fort Myers, to shutter nonessential businesses and order people to remain at home. County commissioners have refused to go that far without guidance from the governor.

Wildly different approaches by local officials have prompted outrage, especially online. While the city of Jacksonville, in Duval County, shut down its beaches, St. Johns County to the south did not. A striking aerial photo over the weekend showed bare beaches on one side of the county line and crowded sand on the other. (St. Johns County later closed its shoreline.)

“It’s really rather scary, because my neighbors aren’t really paying attention — and I live in an elderly community,” said Vicki Stanbury, 59, of Boynton Beach, a city in Palm Beach County. She said she was aghast to see people packed inside Walmart and Publix over the weekend without any apparent attention to social distancing.

“There was a little strip mall — Pet Supermarket, open. AT&T store, closed. Post office, open. Laundry center, open. Beauty school, closed. G.N.C., closed. Panera Bread, open,” she said. “I would like to hear the message that this is really serious: ‘Stay home, do not go out. Do not go to religious services. Do not be wandering around Atlantic Avenue with 15 of your friends. Do not go down by the beaches.’”

Democrats have called on the governor, a strong supporter of President Trump, to issue a statewide stay-at-home order, but he has insisted on what he calls a “tailored” approach.

That allowed Hillsborough County to order that people stay at home — and it was that local order Mr. Howard-Browne defied, even as religious services of all kinds have been canceled across the country, or moved online.

The pastor had claimed the First Amendment protected him from having to follow the order. Andrew Warren, the state attorney for Hillsborough County, said emergency orders “are constitutional and valid” and apply to everyone.

“I’d remind the good pastor of Mark 12:31, which says there is no more important commandment than to love thy neighbor as thyself,” said Mr. Warren, a Democrat. “Loving your neighbors is protecting them, not jeopardizing their health by exposing them to this deadly virus.”

Video of the Sunday morning service showed members of the congregation standing close together, even as Mr. Howard-Browne claimed that social distancing rules were in place.

“I know that they’re trying to beat me up for having the church operational, but we are not a nonessential service,” he told parishioners. “Suddenly we are demonized because we believe that God heals, that the Lord sets people free, and they make us out to be some kook.”

Liberty Counsel, an organization whose lawyers frequently defend the religious right, said it would represent Mr. Howard-Browne. The group, which noted that church staff members wore gloves on Sunday and provided hand sanitizer, called the local orders flawed.

“The problem with this administrative order is it was not reviewed by constitutional experts or vetted by a deliberative body,” Mat Staver, Liberty Counsel’s chairman, said in a statement. “Contrary to Sheriff Chronister’s allegation that Pastor Howard-Browne was ‘reckless,’ the actions of Hillsborough County and the Hernando County sheriff are discriminatory against religion and church gatherings.”

Earlier this month, Mr. Howard-Browne, who has been at the White House and prayed over Mr. Trump, had encouraged his parishioners to greet one another despite public health warnings against shaking hands: “This Bible School is open because we are raising revivalists, not pansies,” he said on March 15.

Sheriff Chronister said that lawyers from his office and the county attorney’s office, responding to an anonymous tip, had advised the church’s legal team on Friday that holding services would violate the law. Members of the sheriff’s command staff went to the church in person on Sunday to try to dissuade Mr. Howard-Browne. He would not meet with them, the sheriff said, and held services in the morning and evening.

“They have access to technology allowing them to live stream their services over the internet and broadcast television for more than their 4,000 members to watch from the safety of their own homes,” Sheriff Chronister said. “Instead, they encouraged people to come and gather at church.”

Other area churches, including the 34th Street Church of God, a nondenominational church in Tampa, have shut their doors and moved their services to live stream, the Rev. Thomas Scott said at the news conference.

“We value the importance of the laws of the land, and we value the importance of social distancing,” he said. “And more importantly, protecting our parishioners to make sure that they’re not in harm’s way.”

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — President Trump and congressional Republicans spent the last three years fighting to cut anti-poverty programs and expand work rules, so their support for emergency relief — especially in the form of directly sending people checks, usually a nonstarter in American politics — is a significant reversal of their effort to shrink the safety net.

It has also intensified a long-running debate about whether that safety net adequately protects the needy in ordinary times as well.

“The crisis has made the need for benefits much more visible and the people who receive them seem much more sympathetic,” said Jane Waldfogel, a professor at the Columbia University School of Social Work. “Progressives will argue for making many of these changes permanent, and conservatives will worry about the costs and potential burden on employers, but this has profoundly changed the playing field.”

Those who support more government help for low-income families say the crisis has revealed holes in the safety net that the needy have long understood. It is a patchwork system, largely built for good times, and offers little cash aid to people not working. It pushes the poor to find jobs, and supports many who do, but offers little protection for those without them.

Most rich countries have universal health insurance and provide a minimum cash income for families with children. The United States has neither as well as higher rates of child poverty.

And to a degree that casual observers may not understand, the Trump administration has tried both to shrink safety net programs and make eligibility for them dependent on having a job or joining a work program.

“Relative to other wealthy nations, we’ve always had a fragmented and weak safety net,” said Donald P. Moynihan of the McCourt School of Public Policy at Georgetown University, who is co-author of a book on administrative barriers to aid. “When the government really wants a program to succeed, it takes the simple and more direct approach — sending people checks.”

But while Republicans have agreed to emergency checks, many did so reluctantly, thinking the safety net is already too large. The $2 trillion rescue package ran into last-minute delays last week when four Senate Republicans said the temporary increase in unemployment benefits was too high and would dissuade people from working.

Conservatives say the limits on public aid are a strength of the American system, and they credit work requirements for cutting child poverty in recent years to record lows. If anything, most would go further in extending work requirements to programs where they have been limited or missing, like food stamps and Medicaid.

“It would be a big mistake to make a long-term fundamental change in the safety net in the heat of a very unusual and hopefully very temporary crisis,” said Robert Doar, president of the American Enterprise Institute, a conservative research group. “The combination of work plus assistance has lifted many millions of people out of poverty. I don’t want to give that up and go back to an entitlement system that in good times leads to people passing up the opportunity to work.”

Mr. Doar was referring to the fight over President Bill Clinton’s pledge to “end welfare as we know it,” which decades later still shapes the poverty debate.

The 1996 law Mr. Clinton signed created a program of cash aid for families with children (Temporary Assistance for Needy Families) that abolished guarantees of assistance and imposed time limits, work requirements and deep spending cuts. It prompted rare resignations from some of his aides, who feared it would hurt the poor.

The rolls plunged, falling more than three-quarters nationally and at least 90 percent in eight states. For every 100 poor families with children, only 22 now receive cash aid, from about 80 at the peak of the old welfare system, according to the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. Benefit levels also fell, by at least a third in 23 states. To a degree few thought possible, welfare really did “end.”

But as one side of the safety net shrank, another grew — aid to low-wage workers. Many get refundable tax credits, food stamps and Medicaid, all of which have become more generous to poor workers. For a $10-an-hour worker with two children, two programs (the earned income and child tax credits) provide a combined $8,200 a year. In addition, 29 states offer tax credits of their own.

The result is a “work-based safety net” — more supportive of needy people with jobs but more precarious for those without them.

The economists Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach of Northwestern University and Hilary W. Hoynes of Berkeley found in 2018 that nearly all the growth in federal spending since 1990 has “gone to families with earnings, and to families with income above the poverty line.” They warned the imbalance “is likely to lead to worse outcomes” for the poorest children.

Conservatives point to falling poverty rates to argue the system has worked. By 2018, the share of children in poverty had fallen to about 13 percent, from 30 percent in the early 1980s. (The measure counts taxes and benefits and comes from Christopher Wimer and Sophie Collyer of Columbia University.)

“Would you trade today for 1985?” Mr. Doar asked. “I wouldn’t.”

Liberals argue that most of that poverty reduction occurred in the 1990s, when the economy soared and growth was widely shared, and has been sustained by the tax credit and food stamp expansions — with the latter a program many conservatives would cut. For the last two decades, most economic gains have gone to people at the top, which liberals say makes the need for assistance more pressing.

They also say the poverty rate underestimates hardship because problems like hunger and eviction persist above the poverty line. (The figure varies by location but was $25,700 a year for a family of four in Washington, D.C., in 2018.)

While the current free-fall in employment is unique, liberals say low-wage work is inherently unstable, since hours fluctuate, workers get sick, and jobs frequently end — as they are now doing on a vast scale over the coronavirus. Only about one in four unemployed workers collected jobless benefits last year, and for low-wage workers the share is lower.

“People are working in jobs over which they have very little control,” said Olivia Golden, director of the Center for Law and Social Policy. “They can be laid off for reasons that have nothing to do with their willingness to work.”

Despite the declines, child poverty in the United States remains higher than in most similar countries. About 17.2 percent of American children live on less than half the median income, said Timothy Smeeding, an economist at the University of Wisconsin, citing data from Luxembourg Income Study. That compares to 11.9 percent in Canada, 10.2 percent in the United Kingdom, and 9.4 percent in Ireland. The United States also spends less on needy families as a share of its economy.

“We should be doing better,” Mr. Smeeding said.

A landmark report last year from the National Academy of Sciences showed early deprivation leaves lasting scars — poor children on average are less healthy as adults, and have lower earnings and higher arrest rates.

Importantly, the group found these problems came at least in part from the lack of money itself, and not just related factors like family structure or low parental education. It also found that safety net programs, by raising incomes, reduced the damage.

“The weight of the evidence shows additional resources help kids,” said Greg Duncan, an economist at the University of California-Irvine who led the study group.

Citing such findings, many progressives support a child allowance — a guaranteed income for families with children. The National Academy of Sciences found an annual benefit of $3,000 per child would reduce child poverty by 41 percent.

“Even in good times incomes are very volatile, especially for low-income families,” said Ms. Waldfogel, the Columbia professor, who has studied such allowances in Europe. “A child allowance protects children from swings in the economy.”

Andrew Yang’s star turn in the Democratic presidential primaries was also built on the pledge of an income guarantee — $1,000 a month for every adult.

But conservatives warn cash guarantees would erode work effort and create poverty. The academy predicted the labor effects would be small — earnings for low-wage workers would drop by less than 1 percent — but the right views such claims skeptically.

“Right now, my total concern is to make sure that people who need assistance get it,” said Robert Rector of the conservative Heritage Foundation. “But to simply send out checks in normal times would have massive labor disincentives and would be entirely counterproductive.”

The Trump administration has followed a restrictive philosophy. Three proposed food stamp rules, one finalized, would together cut the caseload of 36 million people by about 10 percent. That is partly because of expanded work requirements, like forcing more people to show they have searched for jobs.

To detractors, such work rules are “paperwork rules” — bureaucratic barriers to aid. In many states, a single missed appointment can lead to lost benefits. But the agriculture secretary, Sonny Perdue, declined to suspend the work rules this month even as the economy was collapsing. Congress has since halted the requirement during the pandemic.

Likewise, the administration has encouraged states to put work requirements on Medicaid, which covers 38 percent of American children. Ten Republican-led states have done so, but federal courts have stopped them all after a rollout in Arkansas led to widespread confusion and loss of coverage.

“The coronavirus underscores how misguided the attacks on Medicaid have been,” said Janet Currie, a Princeton economist. “We want people to have health insurance — so that the sick can get treated and so that other people can be safe, too.”

Mr. Trump has also fought to undermine the Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare, which experts say caused the share of uninsured Americans to rise last year for the first time since the law passed.

Separately, the administration is penalizing legal immigrants for using benefits. (Undocumented immigrants are ineligible for benefits.) Under the so-called public charge rule, the government deems receipt of cash aid, food stamps, public housing or Medicaid a negative factor when legal immigrants seek permanent residence. Many of the families affected have American children.

Ms. Schanzenbach estimates that nearly 20 percent of immigrant households with food stamps will lose benefits — about 1.8 million people. “You can’t talk about the safety net today without talking about immigrants,” she said. The White House has said immigrants should not depend “on the largess of United States taxpayers.”

Just as it took the Great Depression to birth the modern welfare state, progressives hope the great pandemic will bolster efforts to fortify it, through policies like universal health, paid sick leave and child allowances.

“It is incomprehensible that we remain the only major country on earth not to guarantee health care to all,” Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont said last week in an interview with NPR. “People are beginning to rethink the nature of American society and the role that government plays in our life.”

Melissa Boteach of the National Women’s Law Center argues the crisis could leave a legacy of greater solidarity. “It’s exposed the myth that poor people suffer from ‘dependency,’” she said, noting that all Americans have depended heavily on low-wage workers, like grocery clerks and health aides. “It shows we’re all dependent on each other.”

But the crisis will also leave a legacy of national debt, which could impede future spending plans. Conservatives say the problem is the virus — not the free-market — and warn a government expansion will bring higher taxes and less prosperity.

“Extraordinary threats like war and pandemics require extraordinary responses,” Bobby Jindal, a former Republican governor of Louisiana, wrote in The Wall Street Journal. “They don’t require conservatives to abandon their principles.”

<|endoftext|>

Joseph R. Biden Jr. is working the phones with top donors while cloistered in his Delaware home. His digital team is searching for the right tone to ask small contributors for cash during the sharpest economic downturn in their lifetimes. And his finance operation is plotting how to keep the checks coming when catered parties for big contributors are on hold — indefinitely.

Top Biden fund-raisers and donors, as well as campaign, super PAC and Democratic Party officials, described urgent efforts to reimagine the ways they raise money during a pandemic and global economic slowdown. And in nearly two dozen interviews, they expressed deepening concern that the downturn could choke off the flow of small online donations as millions of people lose their jobs.

The coronavirus shut down much of the American economy just as the former vice president took control of the Democratic presidential race, upending his plans to consolidate support among party donors who had previously supported other candidates and diminishing his ability to replenish his cash reserves to compete with President Trump’s well-funded re-election campaign.

Mr. Trump and Mr. Biden face the same headwinds. But the president began March with an enormous financial advantage over the Democrats: a combined roughly $225 million in cash on hand between his re-election campaign, the Republican National Committee and their shared committees. Mr. Biden and the Democratic National Committee had only $20 million, after accounting for debts.

Mr. Biden’s campaign has not said how much money he has raised since mid-March, when the virus began taking its toll on the country, but multiple fund-raisers said that giving was slowing and that they were reluctant to make aggressive requests for cash at this fragile moment, as the campaign itself readies for a 100 percent virtual and digital operation.

These should be some of the busiest and headiest days for Mr. Biden and his fund-raising team in normal times, now that he has knocked out all of his rivals but Senator Bernie Sanders, who trails by a nearly insurmountable 300 delegates. But instead he has found himself holed up in Wilmington, Del., and limited so far to three video fund-raisers from a makeshift studio installed in the retrofitted rec room of his house.

“It is definitely harder to raise money now,” said Mathew Littman, a former Biden speechwriter in California who is organizing a video fund-raiser and recently started a separate super PAC to raise money to support Mr. Biden in Western states. “The fun aspect of the fund-raiser is taken out of it.”

“You have to be very sensitive to what’s going on with people’s lives,” Mr. Littman added. “This is definitely a much softer pitch than it was two weeks ago because the economy is going to be in either recession or a depression for a bit.”

Some top fund-raisers said the notion of thumbing through call lists of friends to raise money for politics during an unprecedented economic and health crisis was tone deaf. Others are simply focused elsewhere right now. They are investors who have seen their portfolios hammered, business owners trying to triage their holdings and take care of their employees, philanthropists with links to cultural institutions at risk of collapse, or even health care systems bracing for the virus’s full impact.

“You don’t fund-raise now,” Ed Rendell, a Democratic former governor of Pennsylvania and a Biden supporter, said in an interview a week ago. “I haven’t called anyone for money in the last 10 days and I don’t intend to. Not while people are confined to their homes. I just don’t think it’s appropriate. Plus, people are worried about money.”

While the Trump campaign begins with a big financial advantage, a suite of Democratic super PACs are helping the Biden cause, with more than $275 million in announced ads already.

Michèle Taylor, vice-chair of a pro-Biden super PAC, Unite the Country, said the group was not proactively seeking out new donors right now given that “people don’t know what their economic future looks like.”

But money is still flowing. “We’re still having donors coming to us, our fund-raising continues to go well because people understand the urgency,” she said of getting rid of Mr. Trump. “We don’t have to tell people we need a change of leadership.”

Terry McAuliffe, the former Virginia governor and Democratic National Committee chairman, began meeting with donors on behalf of Unite the Country before the coronavirus froze such activities earlier in March. But after the primary ends, Mr. McAuliffe is expected to join the Biden campaign in some capacity, according to Democrats familiar with the planning.

The Biden campaign held one call in mid-March with an intimate group of some of the most prolific Democratic bundlers in the country, including Jonathan Gray, the president and chief operating officer of the private equity firm Blackstone; Jane Hartley, a former ambassador to France; Blair Effron, a founder of the investment firm Centerview Partners; Roger Altman, the founder of the investment firm Evercore; and Mark Gallogly, the founder of another investment company, Centerbridge Partners, according to people familiar with the call.

From his home, Mr. Biden has been making some calls personally, reaching out to those who initially supported other candidates while thanking early contributors and his most influential bundlers.

“In politics, we usually go back to the people who did the most,” said John Morgan, a Florida donor who hosted an event for Mr. Biden last year and spoke recently with him.

One person close to the Biden campaign said preliminary discussions were underway for how to plan for a situation in which in-person fund-raisers do not happen all the way through the general election in November, though that is not seen as the likeliest outcome.

More and more of the campaign’s finance operation is going virtual. The Biden campaign also recently held a national finance committee call on which Jennifer O’Malley Dillon, Mr. Biden’s new campaign manager, was introduced. 

Money has been relatively scarce for Mr. Biden throughout the 2020 race. Entering March, he was only the sixth biggest spender in the Democratic field, after running a relatively threadbare campaign during the primaries. All told, he has raised less than Mr. Trump had in the bank at the start of March.

“The press kept saying, ‘Biden has no money,’” Mr. Biden said at the last debate, on March 15. “And they were right. Biden had no money.”

But Mr. Biden struck it big with online donors after a South Carolina victory that propelled him down the path toward the nomination. He said at the same debate that he had raised $33 million in the first 15 days of March — far more than in any previous full month.

Then came the coronavirus, which has sapped overall online donations to Democrats on ActBlue, the party’s main portal for online giving. The site processed an average of $7.2 million per day of donations in the first half of March; that number has plunged to $3.7 million on average since March 16.

Mr. Biden does continue to spend heavily on Facebook fund-raising ads — a sign that donors are still responding and giving, according to veteran digital operatives. Mr. Biden has invested more than $100,000 per day on Facebook since Super Tuesday, a level he had previously hit only in his first week as a candidate.

A number of top Biden contributors had hoped for a splashy in-person national finance committee meeting in April, seeing that as an opportunity to kick off the general election — but almost no one believes that such a gathering could occur in person now.

“If there are people who are waiting to contribute in association with an event, they need to get past that and go online and make a contribution,” said Howard Wolfson, a top strategist for former Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg of New York, who dropped out of the presidential race in March and has redirected $18 million to the D.N.C.

Multiple donors said they had been told that Greg Schultz, whom Ms. O’Malley Dillon replaced but who remains a top Biden campaign adviser, would be moved to the Democratic National Committee, with a senior role coordinating between the party and the campaign, according to people familiar with the matter.

The campaign, which declined to comment for this article, has said publicly only that Mr. Schultz would be focused on “organizational planning for the general election” and “external outreach.”

Mr. Biden has not yet entered into a joint fund-raising agreement with the D.N.C., which would allow him and the party to solicit far larger checks — for hundreds of thousands of dollars — compared with the current $5,600 limit.

The absence of such an accord is one of the more concrete effects of Mr. Sanders’s decision to stay in the race, hindering Mr. Biden’s and the party’s ability to close the fund-raising gap with Mr. Trump. Mr. Biden almost certainly cannot formally clinch the nomination until June unless the Vermont senator exits sooner.

The D.N.C. has said it would offer matching agreements in 2020 only to all “bona fide” candidates, after a backlash from the Sanders campaign to its 2016 agreement with Hillary Clinton.

Mr. Biden’s campaign had actually started experimenting with videoconference fund-raisers months ago, after he was unable to attend an event in Baltimore because a tractor-trailer accident.

Mr. Biden held his first planned dial-in event in November, and another in December. The benefits are significant: It takes far less time — often as little as 30 minutes. It does not involve any traditional hosting expenses. And there is zero time spent traveling from event to event.

“If used properly, you can still create a bond,” Michael Kempner, a public relations executive and top Democratic fund-raiser who co-hosted two of the recent Biden virtual fund-raisers. “You can still create deep personal interactions that feel as if you are in the room.”

As the campaign adjusts to the new reality, several pro-Democratic outside groups have been jockeying to serve as leading anti-Trump and pro-Biden entities in the coming months. On Monday, two of those groups, Unite the Country and American Bridge, announced a partnership.

There have been intensifying discussions among strategists and donors over which Democratic super PAC should lead the charge into November. Priorities USA, which was the biggest pro-Clinton super PAC in 2016, has already set a $150 million ad budget ahead of the Democratic National Convention this summer, and the group announced a $17 million digital ad reservation on Friday in a show of financial force.

Katie Glueck and Jonathan Martin contributed reporting.

<|endoftext|>

This is the Coronavirus Briefing, an informed guide to the global outbreak. Sign up here to get the briefing by email. 

Roughly three out of four Americans are, or will soon be, under instructions to stay indoors.

The Tokyo Olympics have been rescheduled for July 2021.

Retailers like Macy’s, Gap and L Brands said most of their hundreds of thousands of employees would soon be furloughed.

Get the latest updates here, plus maps and full coverage

April may prove to be the cruellest month for Americans in the coronavirus outbreak. With case counts rocketing, new hot spots flaring and hard-hit hospitals maxing out, health experts persuaded President Trump over the weekend to forget any hope of reopening the country by Easter.

Mr. Trump announced grimly that federal guidelines requiring most Americans to avoid nonessential travel, going to work, eating at bars and restaurants, or gathering in groups of more than 10 would be extended at least through April 30, and possibly longer.

“During this period, it’s very important that everyone strongly follow the guidelines,” Mr. Trump told reporters on Sunday. His hope now, he said in a televised interview, was that the daily tally of new U.S. cases might peak in April.

Many states, counties and cities have already gone further than the federal guidelines, imposing mandatory stay-at-home orders, business closures and other restrictions. New rules are taking effect Monday in Virginia, Kansas, Maryland and North Carolina; about three-quarters of Americans are now covered by state or local orders.

As of Monday afternoon, at least 156,391 people across the country had tested positive for the novel coronavirus, according to a New York Times database, and at least 2,897 deaths are linked to it.

Both figures are still rising fast. Dr. Anthony Fauci, the United States’ leading infectious disease expert, said on Monday that the country was only beginning to experience the true scale of the pandemic. Before it ends, he said, “I wouldn’t be surprised if we saw over 100,000 deaths.”

The Times is providing free access to much of our coronavirus coverage, and our Coronavirus Briefing newsletter — like all of our newsletters — is free. Please consider supporting our journalism with a subscription.

Washington State had the country’s first coronavirus case, the first death, and the first full-blown outbreak. It was also among the first to call for social distancing and tell people to stay home — and that may soon put it among the first to start turning the corner.

Deaths in the state are still rising, but more slowly than in other states. And the hospital system, which had been bracing for a critical shortage of equipment, has so far avoided being overwhelmed.

Perhaps the most encouraging evidence comes out of Seattle, which has seen a significant drop in its infection rate. In early March, infected people were spreading the virus to 2.7 other people on average. The figure appears to have fallen now to 1.4.

“That’s great news and a great trend,” said Mike Baker, our Seattle bureau chief. But there’s a caveat, he said: “They really need to get that number below 1 to get active infections to actually begin decreasing.”

Intriguing data from Kinsa, a medical technology firm, seems to show a rapid drop in the number of people with fevers — which can be a telltale symptom of most coronavirus infections — in places that have issued stay-at-home orders, restaurant closures and other strict measures.

The data comes from the firm’s more than one million internet-connected thermometers in use across the country. For example, noticeably fewer fevers were recorded in Manhattan after schools and bars there were closed.

“It looks like a way to prove that social distancing works,” said Dr. William Schaffner, a preventive medicine expert at Vanderbilt University’s medical school. “But it does show that it takes the most restrictive measures to make a real difference.”

While most of Europe is effectively locked down, some nations have tried to contain outbreaks without shutting down their economies or closing themselves off from the world. They are starting to feel the consequences.

In Russia, the Kremlin and state media had said for weeks that the virus could be controlled without the kinds of extreme restrictions imposed in Italy or Spain. But the country’s case count is rising rapidly.

President Vladimir Putin has largely hidden from the crisis, but the mayor of Moscow and other local officials have begun acting on their own, issuing stay-at-home orders that began Monday. And the country now says it will close all its land borders, not just the China border, which it closed in January.

Sweden has taken a much laxer approach than its neighbors, with much of public life carrying on as usual. The country’s borders, restaurants, grade schools and ski slopes remain open.

The Swedish prime minister has called for a “controlled spread” of the virus and appealed to the public’s sense of collective responsibility to contain it.

“That’s the way we work in Sweden,” said Anders Tegnell, Sweden’s state epidemiologist. “Our whole system for communicable disease control is based on voluntary action.”

But the country’s infection curve is rising sharply, and some Swedes are questioning whether the government is risking lives unnecessarily.

A 1,000-bed Navy hospital ship, the Comfort, docked in Manhattan on Monday morning. It will take on patients who do not have the coronavirus, freeing up beds in the city’s overwhelmed hospitals.

With the relief comes a big risk: The virus is known to spread readily on ships, and Navy officials are aware that one positive case could turn the Comfort into a floating petri dish.

Thirty-five people with the coronavirus have died in Detroit in less than two weeks. The virus could pose a particular challenge for the city, where many residents live in poverty.

New Jersey has the second-most cases in the U.S., after New York. The governor announced 3,347 new positive cases on Monday, bringing the total to 16,636. There have been 198 deaths.

Officials in Spain called for a national period of “hibernation,” imposing strict new limits on movement that will last at least until April 9. Spain reported more than 812 new deaths on Monday.

More than 4,000 uniformed members of New York City’s police department were out sick last week — nearly 11 percent of the force. At least 442 officers and 70 civilian employees have tested positive for the virus. 

Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel, who had gone into quarantine after possible exposure through an aide, has tested negative.

Some experts have raised concerns that China might have underreported the extent of its outbreak and death toll. The country’s tally of about 82,000 confirmed cases does not include people who test positive but show no symptoms.

Shop for groceries safely: Arrive early, when the store is probably cleanest and best stocked, and aim to pick up a week’s worth in one trip. Bring sanitizer and wipes to clean the cart, car handles and your hands.

Keep calm and stream: If you need a break, but not a lengthy one, we’ve rounded up a dozen films worth watching on Netflix that run under 90 minutes.

“Wash washy wash, washy wash your haaaaands!” Sesame Street has updated Elmo’s classic tooth-brushing song “Brushy Brush” to show young viewers how long to wash their hands — still the best precaution against infection.

Spice up your work-at-home lunch: Try one of our 30 recipes for easy, hearty midday meals, ranging from fried rice to roasted tomato and white bean stew.

You’ll find a steady stream of human stories of the coronavirus pandemic on our blog Lives, including a boom in pet adoptions and students who want to abolish grades.

How did a rural county in southwestern Georgia become one of the most intense virus clusters in the country? Ellen Barry writes that the explosion started at a well-attended funeral.

Celebrities are stuck at home, too, and they’re posting lots of selfie videos. But rather than inspiring their fans, their platitudes and luxurious surroundings are just getting on people’s nerves, our critic-at-large Amanda Hess writes.

Many restaurants were already planning for a future when delivery would make up a sizable share of their business. They just didn’t expect it to arrive so quickly.

After the SARS epidemic in 2002, China created a system for reporting infectious diseases that was meant to sidestep political meddling. But when the coronavirus emerged, it didn’t work.

Many people are filling diary pages with their experiences of life during a pandemic. Here are some quarantine journals from around the world.

Whether people take social distancing warnings seriously has become yet another front in America’s partisan culture war, McKay Coppins writes in The Atlantic.

Panic buying is causing shortages of baby essentials, including diapers and formula, and that has left some American families scrambling.

For a taste of sweet harmony, try this video of students in Rome singing the Crosby, Stills & Nash song “Helplessly Hoping” a cappella from their homes.

My daughter lives abroad in London and I am in N.Y. As we are both in some form of “shelter in place,” we cook together via FaceTime on Sundays. Based on what we can each find in our bare-shelved stores, we pick a NYT recipe and she enjoys a glass of wine, while I have my morning coffee. I look forward to continuing this long after the virus has gone.

— Christine Urbano, Albany, N.Y.

Let us know how you’re dealing with the outbreak. Send us a response here, and we may feature it in an upcoming newsletter.

Sign up here to get the briefing by email.

Lara Takenaga and Jonathan Wolfe helped write today’s newsletter.

<|endoftext|>

His is a new coalition, couch-bound and spooked, finding small comforts where few had sought sustenance before: in the tender embrace of a disaster briefing by Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo.

Fans share text messages about the accent — the Queens English, brusque but empathetic — and the cable-news group therapy of his slide show presentations, their pick-me-ups rendered with the force of executive orders. (“Find Ways To: Create Some JOY,” one caption instructed on Sunday.)

They daydream about Mr. Cuomo’s job prospects — Might he join a Biden administration? Might there be a Cuomo administration, somehow? — and indulge in mischievous embroidery.

“I’m always trying to keep up with what’s happening in the zeitgeist,” said Rachelle Hruska MacPherson, the founder of a cashmere sweater company, Lingua Franca, which now counts a $285 “cuomo for president” piece among its hottest sellers, with dozens of buyers already from as far as Texas, Montana and New South Wales, Australia.

On Monday, Mr. Cuomo reiterated that he would be disappointing them. “I’m not running for president,” he told reporters at his latest coronavirus update.

But with the man who is running (and leading the Democratic contest), Joseph R. Biden Jr., functionally confined to campaigning from his Delaware home, Mr. Cuomo has become the politician of the moment, held up as the man in command with his state under siege.

More respected than revered over much of his nine-year tenure as governor, never seeing a clean path to a White House promotion he has long been said to covet, Mr. Cuomo now finds himself with a national audience, even as local supporters and critics agree he is much the same as he always was.

“If you’re feeling disoriented, it’s not you,” Mr. Cuomo said over the weekend, speaking generally. “It’s everyone.”

And it is yielding surreal political consequences.

“I keep hearing, ‘Cuomo for President,’” said Jay Jacobs, the chairman of the New York State Democratic Party and a superdelegate to the national convention. “Whether it’s political people that talk to me; or neighbors on the street; or friends I haven’t heard from in a long time; my brother down in Marietta, Ga., texting me; my sister-in-law — it’s off the charts.”

Here it is important to distinguish wish-casting from reality, as reinforced in conversations with Cuomo allies and party officials like Mr. Jacobs. “Joe Biden is going to be our nominee,” he said.

Instead, the Cuomo flirtation, such as it is, seems most instructive for what it says about those drawn to it, reviving a persistent trope among Trump-era Democrats: the romanticizing of prospective party saviors, even at this point in the nominating calendar, a vice that has yielded all manner of campaign fantasies in recent history.

Maybe Oprah Winfrey would be the one. (She was not interested.) Or Beto O’Rourke. (The electorate was not interested.) Or Michael R. Bloomberg. (Only American Samoa was interested.)

Mr. Cuomo effectively endorsed Mr. Biden, with whom he is close, before the former vice president entered the race, and Mr. Biden remains the heavy favorite for the Democratic nomination, with a significant delegate lead over Senator Bernie Sanders.

No one in a position of relevant authority has said publicly that Mr. Cuomo, a noncandidate with a generational governing challenge on his hands, should be introduced to the mix or elevated in any far-fetched brokered convention scenario. (This did not stop President Trump on Monday from boosting Mr. Cuomo to taunt Mr. Biden, telling Fox News that the governor would be “a better candidate than Sleepy Joe.”)

There is reason to doubt that Mr. Cuomo will end up in Washington at all, even if Mr. Biden reaches the White House. Mr. Biden has pledged to pick a woman as his running mate, and Mr. Cuomo says he does not want the job. The possibility of him being drafted regardless, of electoral circumstances changing drastically enough in the coming months to spur a reversal of that pledge and Mr. Cuomo’s protestations, is remote. No one in the Biden camp has indicated that this is under consideration.

Still, with Mr. Biden often straining to break through in recent weeks, Democrats absorbing the brash monologues and score-settling of Mr. Trump are plainly eager for any steady-handed fact-slinging from those on the front lines of the virus response.

Pete Souza, the former White House photographer for Barack Obama, shared an old photograph on Instagram on Friday of Mr. Obama with Mr. Cuomo. “A former President with the current acting President,” Mr. Souza wrote. The image has been “liked” more than 240,000 times.

Mr. Biden, left to conduct live-streams and remote television interviews from home, is conscious of his current limitations. “Thanks for giving me the time,” he said at the end of an MSNBC appearance on Monday, “so they don’t wonder where I am.”

He has also been quick to praise Mr. Cuomo. “I think he is doing a hell of a job,” Mr. Biden said on MSNBC last week. “I think he has been the lead horse here.”

If crises tend to amplify and accentuate the most essential tics and instincts of elected leaders, Mr. Cuomo’s reputation for inveterate micromanagement and swaggering protectiveness appears to be serving him well in his televised ubiquity. In public sessions, Mr. Cuomo has long evoked a father who greets his daughter’s prom date with a vise-grip handshake and an overlong stare — then chaperones the dance anyway, just in case. Now, he has a virus to eye warily.

Those appraising Mr. Cuomo’s handling of the pandemic tend to sort themselves into three camps: admirers, new and old, disinclined to miss his daily appearances; longtime skeptics conceding grudging recognition for his triumphs of tone; and other opponents, particularly among progressive activists in New York City, warning that he is still not to be trusted.

All three groups allow that they did not expect to encounter a Cuomo boom cycle this year. A Siena College poll of New Yorkers, released on Monday, found Mr. Cuomo with a 71 percent favorability rating, his best showing in seven years and a 27-point spike from February. Eighty-seven percent of respondents approved of his performance in the crisis.

“Imagine if you told me a few years ago,” tweeted Amy Spitalnick, a former aide to Mayor Bill de Blasio who tussled often with the governor’s operation while at City Hall, “that I’d look forward to watching a Cuomo press conference every day.”

In an interview, Ms. Spitalnick suggested that if Mr. Cuomo had not exactly changed, the circumstances had. “He’s still the guy from Queens,” she said, contrasting him with Mr. Trump, another native of the borough. “He’s being straightforward and direct about what New York needs. The other guy from Queens is not providing that.”

Some past adversaries have been less charitable, urging new converts not to be persuaded. They say that while Mr. Cuomo’s news conferences might be well calibrated, New York could have done more earlier in the month to protect its citizens, noting that officials in states like California and Ohio seemed to act more decisively at times.

While Mr. de Blasio has been faulted for mischaracterizing the threat in several past comments, Mr. Cuomo bristled at the mayor’s initial reference to a possible “shelter-in-place” order for the city about two weeks ago, arguing that panic could be “a bigger problem than the virus” if people felt trapped at home. Mr. Cuomo did direct the closing of nonessential workplaces and tell residents to stay home as much as possible.

“You’re trying to balance this,” he told reporters on Sunday, when asked why the state had not moved more quickly, adding, “I think we were one of the first to shut it down.”

Since then, activists have faulted Mr. Cuomo for not doing more to accommodate vulnerable prison populations, pushing for a wider-scale inmate release beyond a decision to remove certain parole violators from the jails.

Several Democrats have also accused Mr. Cuomo of not offering sufficient assistance to tenants, calling for the outright cancellation of rent in the near term. (Mr. Cuomo has announced an order waiving mortgage payments for three months for affected homeowners, while issuing a 90-day moratorium on evictions.)

With the state budget in flux, some progressives have shown particular frustration with Mr. Cuomo’s aversion to higher taxes on the rich, which the governor has said would do more harm than good to the fragile economy. Even before the virus hit, Mr. Cuomo revealed plans to seek billions in savings from Medicaid spending.

“A lot of people are seeing Cuomo for the first time,” said Jonathan Westin, the director of New York Communities for Change, an advocacy group. “In the longer term, I think people will see through Cuomo’s veiled attempt to position himself as an everyman.”

The debate has played out in forums unaccustomed to disputes over financial forecasting in Albany. Comments on an Instagram post promoting the Cuomo-branded cashmere sweater appeared to pit come-lately cheerleaders against others who claimed more familiarity with his history.

“Corporate Democrat,” one account labeled him, responding to the “cuomo for president” message.

“YOU BETTER MEAN RIVERS,” wrote another. (That would be Rivers Cuomo, of the band Weezer.)

But on his own Twitter profile, the singer — more puckish than politically inclined on social media — has taken to identifying himself by another name now:

“Gov. Cuomo.”

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — The numbers the health officials showed President Trump were overwhelming. With the peak of the coronavirus pandemic still weeks away, he was told, hundreds of thousands of Americans could face death if the country reopened too soon.

But there was another set of numbers that also helped persuade Mr. Trump to shift gears on Sunday and abandon his goal of restoring normal life by Easter. Political advisers described for him polling that showed that voters overwhelmingly preferred to keep containment measures in place over sending people back to work prematurely.

Those two realities — the dire threat to the country and the caution of the American public — proved decisive at a critical juncture in the response to the pandemic, his advisers said. The first of those two realities, the deadly arc of the virus, has been known for weeks even if disregarded by the president when he set his Easter target. But the second of the two upended Mr. Trump’s assumptions about the politics of the situation and restrained, for a moment at least, his eagerness to get back to business as usual.

The president’s reversal may prove to be an important pivot point in the effort to curb the pandemic, one that in the view of public health officials averted a greater catastrophe. Mr. Trump’s abrupt change of heart reflected a volatile president who has veered from one message to another, at points equating the virus to ordinary flu that will “miraculously” go away and at others declaring it an all-out war endangering the country.

His move came as additional governors took action to stop the spread of the virus. With new orders on Monday from the governors of Arizona, Maryland and Virginia, as well as the mayor of the District of Columbia, more than half of the 50 states and three out of four Americans are or will soon be under the directive to remain at home.

They took that action as the number of cases in New York climbed past 66,500 and the number of deaths surpassed 1,200, by far the most of any state. Layoffs continued apace, with Macy’s announcing it would furlough a “majority” of its 125,000 workers. Gap said it would do the same for 80,000 store employees in the United States and Canada.

In the past two days, Mr. Trump has dispensed with the assertion that the cure could be worse than the disease and circled back closer to the tenor of the warnings he has gotten from health advisers. Rather than lift the restrictions he had outlined by April 12, he extended them to April 30 and said on Monday that they “may be even toughened up a little bit,” although a national stay-at-home order like those in New York and California was “pretty unlikely, I would think, at this time.”

At Monday’s briefing, Mr. Trump recycled his line from a couple of weeks ago putting the virus ahead of the economy among his concerns. “The economy is No. 2 on my list,” he said. “First, I want to save a lot of lives.”

Indeed, he again accentuated the starkest projections given to him by public health officials, noting that more than two million Americans could have died in the absence of any measure, perhaps to set expectations so that any eventual death toll below that can be cast as a victory.

But advisers said he was struck by the political surveying that indicated that the public wanted the restrictions to continue long enough to beat back the virus for fear that letting up too soon would simply reinvigorate the outbreak.

“There’s an acknowledgment that there’s no getting ‘back to normal’ if the virus is still a threat,” said Kristen Soltis Anderson, a Republican pollster. “And for the most part, we are seeing people supportive of leaders at the state and federal level, even if there is frustration about an initially slow response. However, if there’s a rush to reopen, the virus surges and people feel like the sacrifices they’ve made so far have been for naught, I can see that changing.”

In a survey conducted by John and Jim McLaughlin, who were pollsters for Mr. Trump during the 2016 campaign, 52 percent of Americans preferred a full national shutdown requiring everyone other than those deemed essential to stay at home as opposed to 38 percent who favored universal testing and isolating only those demonstrated to be infected with the virus.

In a piece on Newsmax, the conservative website run by a friend of the president’s, that appeared the day before Mr. Trump’s reversal, the McLaughlins wrote that the sentiment for a national shutdown prevailed in every region of the country and even among those who said they could not afford to be out of work for a month or less.

A survey released by the Pew Research Center on Monday showed that roughly nine in 10 Americans believe that restrictions on international travel, cancellation of sporting and entertainment events, school closures and limits on gatherings of 10 or more people were necessary responses to the pandemic.

“One of the things that the discourse needs to help the country move forward is what are the dynamics that get you to that transition point to begin to re-engage the economy at that scale,” said David Winston, another Republican pollster. “What you’re seeing at a policy level, at a political level and at an individual level is trying to understand what all those elements are.”

The president’s swerving messages came during a period when he had no fully installed White House chief of staff to guide him and run his operation. He fired Mick Mulvaney, the acting chief of staff, on March 6 and named Representative Mark Meadows of North Carolina, a close Republican ally, to replace him. But Mr. Meadows waited more than three weeks to actually resign his House seat, making it official only at 5 p.m. Monday, and will formally start his new job on Tuesday.

In the interim, Mr. Meadows has been spotted in the West Wing and has attended meetings, but he has only begun to assemble his team, and many holdovers in the White House are nervous about job security as they try to focus on the virus. Michael McKenna, the deputy legislative director, resigned under pressure last week after being accused of making an offensive statement in what some saw as a precursor to a broader shake-up.

Mr. Meadows will bring with him Ben Williamson, his congressional chief of staff, and John C. Fleming, an assistant commerce secretary and Republican former congressman from Louisiana, both of whom will serve him as senior advisers. Other new hires are expected to follow.

Mr. Trump often whipsaws back and forth as aides compete for his ear and offer conflicting advice. The president’s Easter target for reopening came after some of his advisers expressed concern about the devastating effects on the economy wreaked by the widespread closures and urged him to consider making changes to the social distancing measures.

The president’s complaint about the cure and his aspiration to pack the churches by Easter followed.

But then came troubling images from around the country, and especially New York City, where Elmhurst Hospital Center, near his childhood home in Queens, was overwhelmed with patients and where temporary hospital tents were being erected in Central Park. The images were on television and in The New York Post, which he still reads every day. As in 2017, when Mr. Trump was moved to order a surgical airstrike on Syria after seeing horrifying footage of a lethal gas attack, the images helped get him to a new place, officials said.

Mr. Trump also said he now knew people who had been hospitalized because of the coronavirus, without naming them, and seemed almost shocked that his own associates had been affected. “In one case, he’s unconscious in a coma and you say: How did that happen?” Mr. Trump said on Monday.

The larger picture fell to the public health advisers, who provided Mr. Trump with a grim prognosis in a meeting on Sunday before his announcement extending social distancing guidelines. Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, and Dr. Deborah L. Birx, the White House response coordinator, showed the president models of how many people across the country could be affected if more stringent measures were not maintained.

“He looked at them, he understood them, and he shook his head and said, ‘I guess we got to do it,’” Dr. Fauci said on CNN on Monday. That meeting appeared to resonate with Mr. Trump, officials said.

Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina and a close adviser to the president, also said soon before Mr. Trump reversed course that he was counseling the president to look at the arc of the virus. Mr. Graham said the president needed to be focused on a defensive approach to the virus in the spring, taking measures such as the ones he ultimately favored, to be prepared to combat a resurgence in the fall.

Even so, Mr. Trump has continued to paint a rosy picture about the government’s response in the face of widespread criticism. During a conference call with governors on Monday, Gov. Steve Bullock of Montana, who briefly ran for the Democratic nomination to challenge Mr. Trump this fall, asked the president about the lack of availability of testing for those who had contact with infected Americans.

“I haven’t heard about testing in weeks,” Mr. Trump insisted, according to an audiotape of the call provided to The New York Times. He added, “We’ve tested more now than any nation in the world. We’ve got these great tests and we’re coming out with a faster one this week.” And he concluded, “I haven’t heard about testing being a problem.”

During his briefing for reporters later in the day, Mr. Trump characterized the governors as praising him. “I think for the most part they were saying thank you for doing a great job,” he said.

Some Republicans saw a virtue in Mr. Trump’s reversal on reopening the country because of his credibility with his own base, which polls have shown to be somewhat less alarmed about the virus than Democrats.

“Because President Trump initially seemed anxious to open up the economy, his position delaying that should resonate with his base of voters,” said Neil Newhouse, a Republican pollster. “It will probably have the impact of making those who want it opened sooner a little more patient.”

Peter Baker reported from Washington, and Maggie Haberman from New York. Jonathan Martin contributed reporting from Washington.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — The White House coronavirus task force has featured two trusted medical voices, diplomatic but authoritative, able to gently push back on President Trump without incurring his wrath: Drs. Anthony S. Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, and Deborah L. Birx, the coronavirus response coordinator.

But this week, Dr. Birx’s comments casting doubt on talk of ventilator and hospital-bed shortages, and praising Mr. Trump’s attention to detail in lavish terms, have raised questions about her independence as the number of coronavirus infections in the United States has soared past 100,000.

Practically overnight, Dr. Birx has become a partisan Rorschach test. Conservative commentators have praised her as a truth-teller, pushing back on coronavirus hysteria. Critics of Mr. Trump accused her of squandering the credibility she had developed as a health official in Democratic and Republican administrations.

Dr. Birx’s comments, especially those dismissing ventilator shortages, startled some health experts. While most hospitals might have sufficient supplies at the moment, many worry about a crush of patients in the very near future. 

Dr. Howard Bauchner, the editor in chief of The Journal of the American Medical Association, warned Friday of “a potential tsunami coming” on a video call with hundreds of other physicians about rationing ventilators and critical care.

Dr. Ryan A. Stanton, a board member at the American College of Emergency Physicians, said Dr. Birx sounded like “the builders of the Titanic saying the ship can’t sink.”

Public health officials have emphasized that regions of the country less urgently in need of more ventilators could donate some of their inventory to health systems in more desperate need, a point that Dr. Birx made Thursday night.

Mr. Trump on Friday, appearing to respond to widespread criticism from various cities and states, announced that the federal government would issue contracts to buy thousands of ventilators from a variety of large and small makers. But it appeared doubtful the devices could be produced in time to help the overwhelmed hospitals.

Dr. Birx has had to oscillate between occasionally competing forces on the task force, which features a set of doctors and scientists who have often registered skepticism with the White House’s attitude toward coronavirus policy. In private discussions, she has joined with members of the group whom she has known for decades to push the State Department to issue an advisory against traveling on cruises.

This week, she met with Drs. Fauci, Stephen M. Hahn, the commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, and Robert R. Redfield, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, where the group talked through concerns about the Trump administration’s embrace of malaria drugs as possible treatments for Covid-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus, according to a senior administration official.

Publicly, Dr. Birx has been a soothing constant next to Mr. Trump and Vice President Mike Pence in coronavirus meetings and briefings, where she has been one of the few regulars in a rotating cast of health officials perched behind the White House lectern. Mr. Pence, who is overseeing the government’s response, introduced her at the time of her appointment as his “right arm.”

But on Thursday, that delicate balance appeared to tip. After talking to New York officials, Dr. Birx said she had been told that there were still intensive care beds and “over 1,000 or 2,000” ventilators still available. She also dismissed news stories of hospitals drafting blanket do-not-resuscitate orders for critically ill Covid-19 patients.

“To say that to the American people, to make the implication that when they need a hospital bed, it’s not going to be there, or when they need that ventilator, it’s not going to be there — we don’t have evidence of that right now,” she said.

Just a few feet away stood Dr. Fauci, a longtime friend and mentor of Dr. Birx’s, who had his own message: hunker down. He said that the coronavirus could become cyclical. He cautioned that a vaccine was still many months away. And he said that therapeutic treatments, which Mr. Trump has eagerly pushed as a “game changer,” were still unproven.

“The best way to get the best drug as quickly as possible is to do a randomized controlled trial so that you know is it safe and is it effective,” he said. “If it’s not effective, get it off the board and go to the next thing.”

The realities on the ground appear to favor the tone of Dr. Fauci’s warnings. Dr. Mahshid Abir, an emergency physician at the University of Michigan and an expert on hospital preparedness, said on Friday that shortages are inevitable. Hospital systems not only in New York but Atlanta, Seattle and New Orleans are already warning that they have or will reach capacity in the coming days.

“No matter what assumption you use, even on the lower end, the ventilator capacity is just not going to be there,” she said.

The United States currently has 160,000 to 200,000 ventilators, but as many as one million patients might need to use one of the machines during the outbreak, according to the Society of Critical Care Medicine.

Dr. Birx, who has built a well of bipartisan admiration in her years as a health official, has more recently accommodated herself to the political winds with the kind of presidential flattery that Mr. Trump demands from aides.

“He has been so attentive to the details and the data, and his ability to analyze and integrate data has been a real benefit during these discussions about medical issues,” she gushed in an interview with the Christian Broadcasting Network on Wednesday.

To some extent, public health professionals have expressed sympathy for her position.

“Harnessing political will to implement recommendations from the country’s top respiratory disease public health experts and organizing the government to manage the response effectively is hard,” said Dr. Thomas R. Frieden, who worked with Dr. Birx when he ran the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and she oversaw its division on global AIDS. “Many lives depend on getting that balance right.”

A colonel in the Army, she began her career in the early 1980s as an immunologist at the Walter Reed Army Medical Center, and spent part of her training as a fellow in Dr. Fauci’s lab. In 2014, President Barack Obama put her in charge of addressing the global AIDS epidemic. She also created a program called DREAMS, a public-private partnership to reduce rates of H.I.V. among adolescent girls and young women.

In her current role, Dr. Birx’s appeals have extended to some of Mr. Trump’s favorite conservative media personalities. She appeared alongside Mr. Pence in a private White House meeting earlier this month to update figures as divisive and confrontational as Dan Bongino and Eric Bolling.

And she has introduced herself to new crowds, giving advice on self-quarantining this week on “The Morning Toast,” a talk show on YouTube that is popular with a young audience.

In meetings, Mr. Trump appears to prefer Dr. Birx’s genial approach over Dr. Fauci’s blunt talk.

Mr. Trump and several White House officials view Dr. Fauci with some level of skepticism, believing he tends too much to his own public persona and has gone “rogue” on messaging. Dr. Birx, they think, is more willing to be patient with the president’s interruptions and theorizing about medicine.

Among Mr. Trump’s frustrations with Dr. Fauci has been his unwillingness to embrace the malaria drugs that Mr. Trump has celebrated, chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine. Dr. Fauci has been much more vocal about their risks, and dismissed potential evidence of their success in treating the coronavirus as anecdotal.

Noah Weiland reported from Washington, and Maggie Haberman from New York. Sheri Fink contributed reporting from New York.

<|endoftext|>

Carlos Polanco was living in a dormitory just two weeks ago, taking classes and thinking mostly about getting good grades and life after graduation. Now he is back in Clifton, N.J., home schooling his 12-year-old sister, doing household chores and worrying about the health of his relatives in the Dominican Republic.

“It would be amazing if I could just focus on my classes,” said Mr. Polanco, a junior at Dartmouth College, “but I have a lot of people depending on me.”

Students like Mr. Polanco, who have returned to a home life disrupted by the coronavirus, have been pushing their institutions to set aside grades during the outbreak, arguing that online classes are often a poor substitute and that the chaos caused by the virus falls hardest on those with the least resources.

Over the past few days, colleges across the country have begun to respond, with schools as varied as Ohio State, Columbia and Carnegie Mellon adopting a seemingly endless variety of pass/fail or credit/no credit systems, at a scale not seen since the protests against the Vietnam War disrupted classes in the late 1960s.

Some universities will still offer the option of letter grades, while others have dropped them altogether. But that’s not good enough for some students, who are seeking a “universal pass” — meaning that nobody would fail, regardless of performance and whether they can continue to take online classes, and that letter grades would be abolished.

The idea has acquired petition campaigns on scores of campuses and even an acronym among the cognoscenti: UP.

“The reality is, there are people who will not pass their classes, there are people who will not finish the semester, who will not graduate on time,” Mr. Polanco said. “The most vulnerable will be drastically harmed.”

But some institutions, and even students, have resisted proposals to give everyone equal marks, saying that the idea gives “gut courses” new meaning. It is possible to work hard, they say, even when your world has been turned upside down.

The debate is of particular concern to students trying to raise their grade-point averages in their final year or two of college to qualify for law, medical or business schools. Some fear it will hurt their chances if their college careers end with a “pass” instead of high marks.

That dynamic is playing out for Lydia Burleson, a junior majoring in English at Yale. Administrators there have instituted an optional pass/fail, allowing students to choose whether they want a letter grade. But undergraduates have started a “@NoFailYale” Facebook page, where many are calling for a universal pass policy.

That would be problematic for Ms. Burleson, who said she struggled during her first year of college because her high school in rural Texas did not prepare her for the academic and social demands of an Ivy League school. But she has matured, she said, and this semester she is taking 5.5 credits, instead of the normal four or five, hoping it will be her breakthrough year.

She was working three jobs — as a dining hall manager, writing tutor and gym attendant — until the virus hit. She is still getting paid and living off-campus in New Haven, Conn. Despite the crisis atmosphere, she believes that she is still capable of getting good grades.

“I have not been working 70 hours a week to not feel confident,” Ms. Burleson said. “I want those grades. I’ve been working for those grades for the majority of the semester. So yeah, I will ask for grades if the option remains available to me, which is still up in the air.”

Although some schools were quick to adopt a form of pass/fail, it has been an item of heated debate among faculty senates and student representatives on other campuses. At the University of California Los Angeles, the student government held a seven-hour virtual meeting on Tuesday night to debate the topic, eventually endorsing a pass/no record system, but with the option for individual students to “unmask” their letter grades.

Robert Blake Watson, the student body president, participated in the debate from his home in Louisville, Ky., until it ended at 4 a.m. Mr. Watson, who plans to go to law school in the fall, said that as a matter of compassion, he had favored a mandatory pass/no record policy, so that choosing not to get a letter grade would not potentially stigmatize disadvantaged students.

“If you become ill with Covid-19, you’re being evicted from your apartment, you have lost wages,” he said. For those who want letter grades, “the problem is,” he said, “who are they getting that letter grading at the expense of?”

Still, many universities that have adopted a pass/fail system have tried to preserve the option for letter grades in some way.

At Berkeley, passed/not passed is now the default, but students are being given a choice of a regular grade. The University of Michigan has announced that undergraduates will receive either a pass or a notation of NRC, short for “No Record Covid,” on their transcripts. They will also be able to request a conversion to letter grades.

Ohio State’s university senate adopted a pass/no pass option for elective courses, and is allowing individual colleges to decide whether to extend it to courses required for majors, a move students have pushed for.

“These courses tend to be more difficult and play a larger role in your career,” said Roaya Higazi, the university’s incoming student body president, who added that it has been difficult to get access to the software she needs to take classes from her home computer.

Updated Dec. 18, 2020

The latest on how the pandemic is reshaping education.

Mr. Polanco, the Dartmouth student arguing for a universal pass policy, said that at schools with semesters, rather than on a quarter system like his, students have already put in several weeks of work, so they wouldn’t pass based on nothing. But even if they were failing before the coronavirus shut down campuses, he said, it shouldn’t matter, and the focus on grades is beside the point. “In reality, we go to school to learn, not really to receive a grade.”

Administrators at his school aren’t so cavalier. So far, they have rejected the idea of passing everyone, as well as another student proposal that everyone who passes a course would get an A or an A-minus, to preserve their standing for scholarship or graduate school applications that rely on grades.

“Our faculty believe deeply that the A signifies outstanding work,” Joseph Helble, the provost, wrote to students, explaining why the school had decided on a credit/no credit model instead. Adopting other models, he said, “would undermine that commitment.”

The concern that professional schools might look askance at a “pass” grade from undergraduates might prove to be overblown. A Yale spokeswoman said the university’s professional schools would not hold pass/fail grades against applicants, whether the choice to forgo letter grades was theirs or the institution’s. And the medical school at the University of California, San Francisco, said it would accept pass/fail marks “without prejudice” for classes taken during the pandemic.

“It has always been our practice to consider grades in the context of numerous other aspects of the application, and an international crisis certainly provides a unique and compelling perspective,” said Dr. David Wofsy, the medical school’s associate dean for admissions, in an email.

Veteran college professors say the last time they can recall such turmoil on campus was during the Vietnam War, particularly after the Kent State shootings on May 4, 1970, when the National Guard fired on students during a protest against the U.S. invasion of Cambodia, killing four and wounding nine. Amid widespread strikes, classes were suspended across the country, and some universities allowed students to switch to pass/fail marks.

“I don’t think anything like this has happened since then, so 50 years ago, half a century,” said Rick Danheiser, a chemistry professor and the chair of the faculty at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, which was one of the first schools to adapt its grading system to the pandemic.

The M.I.T. iteration is pass/no record, meaning that if a student fails a course, it is wiped from the record, with a note placed in transcripts indicating that the semester was subject to a significant disruption, as context to medical, law, business and other schools.

“The reality is that the performance of students this semester is not only going to reflect the mastery of a subject,” Prof. Danheiser said, “but also could be impacted by differences between students due to their different health situations, the health of their loved ones, different access to technology, different home situations.”

“We felt it would be unfair and not equitable,” he said, “to try to proceed under the conditions of this global crisis with business as usual.”

Nicholas Bogel-Burroughs contributed reporting. Kitty Bennett contributed research.

<|endoftext|>

DETROIT — It has seen its population plummet, houses fall to ruin, and the largest municipal bankruptcy in the nation. Now another crisis has descended on Detroit: the coronavirus.

In less than two weeks, 35 people with the coronavirus have died in Detroit. The police chief has tested positive for the virus, and more than 500 police officers are in quarantine. On Sunday morning, the city’s downtown, a center of Detroit’s post-bankruptcy resurgence, was quiet and mostly deserted.

The coronavirus has landed on this city’s doorstep, its unwelcome arrival a sign of the outbreak’s growing reach across America to cities far from the coasts and not as densely populated as New York. But the virus could place a unique burden on Detroit, a city of 670,000 people where three of 10 residents live in poverty, a large number have asthma and other chronic diseases, and hospitals are already overwhelmed. It is a city that has seen more than its share of crisis, and now finds itself staring at yet another.

Residents have been shaken by the number of people falling ill from the virus, including a well-known community activist, Marlowe Stoudamire, who died last week at the age of 43. He had attended a neighborhood pancake breakfast on March 6 where several police officers apparently were exposed.

“Everybody is starting to understand that this virus is looking for more hosts,” Mayor Mike Duggan of Detroit said in an interview on Sunday. “Even if you’re young and healthy.”

By Monday afternoon, with more than 6,500 cases, Michigan was fourth in known cases among the states, behind New York, New Jersey and California. Across the state, at least 197 residents have died, placing Michigan fourth across the nation in deaths from the virus, behind New York, Washington and New Jersey.

No one is sure why the Detroit region is seeing a flood of cases in the weeks since officials announced the state’s first known case on March 10. Mr. Duggan said he suspected that the region’s international airport, with a significant number of flights from overseas, may have contributed to the spread.

Since then, the virus has spread to employees in the Detroit police and fire departments and other city services that have been slowly rebuilt over the last several years.

“The city itself is underequipped,” said Dr. Howard Markel, a professor of the history of medicine at the University of Michigan. “It’s a perfect storm of poverty and very rudimentary public health conditions.”

Lately, Detroit has been emerging from a fiscal and economic crisis that was decades in the making, and the specter of a new crisis is dizzying. In 2013, Detroit became the largest city in the United States ever to seek bankruptcy protection, leaving its future utterly uncertain as it struggled under a mound of debt as well as tens of thousands of abandoned buildings, vacant lots and unlit streets. The bankruptcy had followed years of population decline and sliding tax revenues: The city’s role as the early heart of the American automotive industry and home to 1.8 million people in 1950 gave way to fewer than 700,000 residents now.

But there have been many signs of recovery of late, including a rush of new construction and some bustling neighborhoods amid the city’s vast 139 square miles. Some in the city pointed to its size as one possible reason for the quick spread of the virus; people travel long distances, often on the public bus system, to get to jobs.

“Unfortunately, the shift that I’ve seen happen is grief because people are dying now,” Khalilah Gaston, a consultant to nonprofit organizations in Detroit, said. “We’re looking at the numbers everyday. It’s a lot to process.”

One nurse practitioner who works at several hospitals in the Detroit area described dire scenes unfolding.

Hospitals in the Detroit Medical Center network are putting two patients at a time into intensive care unit rooms that are made for one patient, she said. Because of a shortage of equipment, some patients are hooked to portable monitors that cannot be monitored in a single, central system.

“Every day I drive home, I start crying,” said the nurse, who asked that her name not be used for fear of losing her job. “I’ve been in health care for 20 years and I’ve never seen anything like this.”

Brian Taylor, a spokesman for the Detroit Medical Center, declined to address specific questions about how intensive care rooms were being divided or monitors were being used. But he said in an email that “the demand to care for the ever-increasing number of patients is putting a strain on our resources and staff.”

“We are using all available space in our hospitals to care for patients,” he added, including converting operating rooms, outpatient areas and recovery rooms into patient treatment areas to handle the surge.

Also emerging as a concern in a moment when handwashing has become essential is water service in Detroit homes where it had been shut off for nonpayment. City officials promised to restore water service in those homes, and hundreds of people had it restored by the weekend, city officials said.

The number was expected to grow in the coming days, city officials promised. But activists questioned whether city leaders even know all the homes where water is needed, and called on officials to move more rapidly to solve the problem.

“Put aside all of the policies and politicians and you come back to this: One of the main defenses for public hygiene is handwashing,” said Monica Lewis-Patrick, a leader of We the People of Detroit, which has advocated access to safe water for all residents.

Gov. Gretchen Whitmer of Michigan, a Democrat, issued a stay-at-home order for all residents last week, but not everyone in Detroit was heeding the calls for social distancing.

Cherish Browning, 28, said she was at a house party last weekend with about 100 people.

“Everybody’s really not taking it seriously,” she said. Still, she said, many people at the party were wearing masks and gloves.

Dale Rich, a veteran photographer who lives on Detroit’s northeast side, said he believed that generational poverty had, in some pockets of the city, limited the level of alarm over the possibility of infection from the virus.

“If you see prosperity when you go downtown, but every other house of your street is abandoned or falling down, you’re maybe not going to break your neck looking for hand sanitizer,” he said. “This virus is odorless, colorless, tasteless, and that renders it almost unreal. So, if we’re hungry, or trying to find rent, it’s going on the back burner.”

In some realms, though, distancing rules have taken hold. And for social services groups, that has complicated efforts. Lisa Johanon, the executive director of Central Detroit Christian, said her organization had suspended education programs for young people and home repairs for residents, as well as job training, housing counseling and preschool services.

The father of a child the organization works with died from the virus, Ms. Johanon said, adding: “For me and for our staff, it’s like we’ve been in shock. And now it’s like, OK, this is our new reality.”

Areas just outside Detroit have also reported large upticks in cases, with more than 3,500 additional cases and more than 100 additional deaths reported in suburban Wayne, Oakland and Macomb Counties. More than 80 percent of the cases identified in Michigan have been in the Detroit area.

In Genesee County, which includes Flint, at least 150 people are infected and seven people have died. In Washtenaw County, which includes Ann Arbor, more than 260 people are known to have the coronavirus and six have died.

Still, more than 1,800 of the state’s cases have come in Detroit.

“I don’t mean to sound too 30,000-foot about it, but Detroit has always been the canary in the coal mine,” said Dream Hampton, a Detroit filmmaker and writer. “We’ve been on the front lines of the truth of American hypercapitalism for decades.”

“So, yes,” she added, “poor people in the hourly wage and gig economy who lack health insurance have higher rates of the kinds of underlying conditions immunologists are saying put people at risk.”

On the flip side, Ms. Hampton, whose mother is working 12-hour shifts at a hospital in the region, suggested that Detroit — which has experienced a level of economic and fiscal strife unlike almost any other American city — might actually be better prepared to contend with crisis than other places.

“We know what it’s like to come together for one another,” Ms. Hampton said. “We never measured our city’s comeback by how many people moved here from Brooklyn, or how many downtown buildings a single Republican billionaire could buy. We focus on our ability to come together as a community.”

Mary M. Chapman reported from Detroit, Julie Bosman from Chicago and John Eligon from Kansas City, Mo. Mitch Smith contributed reporting from Overland Park, Kan., and Monica Davey from Chicago.

<|endoftext|>

It was an old-fashioned Southern funeral.

There was a repast table crammed with casseroles, Brunswick stew, fried chicken and key lime cake. Andrew Jerome Mitchell, a retired janitor, was one of 10 siblings. They told stories, debated for the umpteenth time how he got the nickname Doorface.

People wiped tears away, and embraced, and blew their noses, and belted out hymns. They laughed, remembering. It was a big gathering, with upward of 200 mourners overflowing the memorial chapel, so people had to stand outside.

Dorothy Johnson has gone over the scene in her mind over the last month, asking herself who it was who brought the virus to her brother’s funeral.

“We don’t know who the person was,” she said. “It would help me to know.”

During the weeks that followed, illnesses linked to the coronavirus have torn through her hometown, Albany, Ga., with about two dozen relatives falling ill, including six of her siblings. Ms. Johnson herself was released from an isolation ward to the news that her daughter, Tonya, was in grave condition, her heart rate dropping.

Like the Biogen conference in Boston and a 40th birthday party in Westport, Conn., the funeral of Andrew Jerome Mitchell on Feb. 29 will be recorded as what epidemiologists call a “super-spreading event,” in which a small number of people propagate a huge number of infections.

This rural county in southwest Georgia, 40 miles from the nearest interstate, now has one of the most intense clusters of the coronavirus in the country.

With a population of only 90,000, Dougherty County has registered 24 deaths, far more than any other county in the state, with six more possible coronavirus deaths under investigation, according to Michael L. Fowler, the local coroner. Ninety percent of the people who died were African-American, he said.

The region’s hospitals are overloaded with sick and dying patients, having registered nearly 600 positive cases. Last week, Gov. Brian Kemp dispatched the National Guard to help stage additional intensive care beds and relieve exhausted doctors and nurses.

Ms. Johnson said that she assumed one of the guests had brought the virus to her brother’s funeral, where “you hug and you kiss and you embrace.” But she had no more information than that.

“Really, there is no face to what is going on in Albany,” she said.

Whether the initial carrier — the whodunit of infectious disease — matters at all depends on whom you ask. But the timing does matter. For 10 days the virus spread, invisibly, and no one knew it was there. By the time stringent social distancing was introduced, on March 22, it was everywhere.

“We’re not blaming that one visitor, but potentially a community is one person away from something like this exploding,” said Scott Steiner, the chief executive of Phoebe Putney Health System, which has taken the brunt of the surge.

“If you get early delivery of it, it shows you what can happen,” he said. “Had that person come in, had a barbecue, visited family and went home, that would have been a different story.”

Mr. Mitchell died suddenly. Emell Murray, Mr. Mitchell’s companion of 20 years, found him in the living room of their home on the morning of Feb. 24, said her daughter, Alice Bell. There was no autopsy, but it appeared to be natural causes, she said, possibly a heart attack.

“He had been up all night,” said Ms. Johnson, his sister. “When she woke up to get the baby ready for school, she found him face down on the floor.”

Dougherty County, dominated by cotton plantations in the 19th century, routinely ranks near the bottom of Georgia’s 159 counties in terms of most health outcomes, with high rates of diabetes and lung disease, and its first coronavirus cases did not stand out to doctors as something unusual.

The night of the funeral, a 67-year-old man who had come to Albany to attend was admitted to Phoebe Putney Memorial Hospital, complaining of shortness of breath, Mr. Steiner said.

The man had chronic lung disease, and no history of travel that would suggest exposure to the coronavirus, and he was not put in isolation, Mr. Steiner said. Staff members figured that he had just run out of oxygen.

The man spent the next week in the hospital, attended by at least 50 employees, then was transferred on March 7 back to the Atlanta area, where he was tested for the coronavirus. Not until March 10 did the Albany hospital learn he had tested positive, Mr. Steiner said. He died on March 12, the state’s first coronavirus death.

By then, the infection was quietly spreading through town. Mr. Mitchell’s longtime companion, Ms. Murray, 75, found herself racked with chills and fever, Ms. Bell, her daughter, said. She was told she had a urinary tract infection and admitted to an ordinary ward, where she was visited by three of her sisters, Ms. Bell said. All three have since become sick with the coronavirus, she said. One of them has died.

On March 10, word reached Albany that the Phoebe Putney patient had tested positive for the virus. A few days of relative quiet followed, and then, in the words of Mr. Fowler, the coroner, “it hit like a bomb.”

“Some of them might have went to the funeral,” Mr. Fowler said. “Some may have been family members of people at the funeral. Every day after that, someone was dying.”

The six-month stockpile of protective equipment that the hospital had prepared was gone, Mr. Steiner said, in seven days.

At first the doctors and nurses just tried to take in what they were seeing: a series of people — including young people in relatively good health — showing up with a cough and fever.

Then, alarmingly, their need for oxygen would sharply increase, and they would go into full-blown respiratory failure, their lungs filling with fluid, said Dr. Enrique Lopez, 41, a surgical intensivist, who specializes in treating the critically ill.

“All the units were full, all of them, and there would be days when we would be intubating five people in a row, back to back, room after room after room,” he said. “It was one of the times in my career I truly felt overwhelmed.”

The cases arrived in great waves, overwhelming each new effort to add beds.

The 14 medical intensive care unit beds were filled within two days of the first wave of coronavirus patients; they converted 12 cardiac I.C.U. beds, but those, too, were filled two days later; 12 beds in the surgical I.C.U. were filled three days after that, Mr. Steiner said.

For a few days, the hospital was so short of staff members that employees who had tested positive but did not yet have symptoms were asked to work.

“If I had 1,000 nurses sitting at home, and could send the ones testing positive out, I would, but we don’t have that, and nobody has that,” Mr. Steiner said. “You get to the point where you say, ‘If I don’t have the staff, I can’t care for the patients.’”

State directives changed last week, mandating a weeklong quarantine for health care workers who test positive.

Dr. Lopez, the surgeon, avoided contact with his family for two weeks, for fear of infecting them.

“I’m sleeping in the garage in one of our closets,” he said. “I park the truck, strip down in the garage, wash myself off, my wife puts out a plate of food for me, I eat the food, and then I go back to the garage.”

The funerals in Albany — of Mr. Mitchell, and then of a man named Johnny Carter, held at the funeral home a week later — quickly emerged as a source of infection.

Of the first 23 patients to test positive at Phoebe Putney, all had attended at least one of the two funerals, Mr. Steiner said. That was easy to figure out.

“This wasn’t like a team of scientists in a bunch of suits,” said Chris J. Cohilas, chairman of the Dougherty County Board of Commissioners. “We’re a big small town where everybody knows everybody. We know who is in our hospital, and we know who went to what funeral.”

Word went out “so quickly and so aggressively” that those who attended either of the funerals should get tested, Mr. Cohilas said. But not quickly enough to prevent an infected person from serving as a juror in a high-profile murder trial that ended on March 12. That set off a new set of infections in the sheriff’s office and the courthouse, he said.

The warnings drove a wedge between people in Albany, said the Rev. Daniel Simmons, the senior pastor of Albany’s Mt. Zion Baptist Church, who, like others interviewed, said he questioned whether the funerals were in fact the sole source of the infections.

“It created fear: Who will be at the gathering that I’m going to on Sunday, that funeral, or that wedding? Do I go? Do I not go?” said Mr. Simmons, whose church was not connected to either funeral. “People began to say, were you at the funeral? That became a question.”

The city’s churches, he said, began to feel unfairly singled out.

“That is the focus: the church, the church,” he said. “It has done damage because there is stigma. There is almost this wall of hostility that has been raised between certain parts of the community and the church.”

Ms. Johnson, whose family hosted the Feb. 29 funeral, said the speculation had been painful.

“I have family members angry because people are saying that my brother was the culprit,” she said. “He’s a dead person. He’s not even breathing. But they’re angry because the rumor mill is saying that he was the spreader of the virus.”

By last week, the question of how the virus had entered the county had been eclipsed by the number of people sick and dying. Mr. Mitchell’s companion, Ms. Murray, has been hospitalized and discharged twice, the last time on March 24, against her daughter’s protests.

“I begged them not to let her come home, but they did it anyway,” Ms. Bell said. “They brought her into this house like a sack of potatoes, on a stretcher.”

Ms. Bell, 49, said she did not have the strength to turn her mother over in bed, and had called repeatedly to ask for help.

“I’m begging for help,” she said. “I’m here with two kids, and I don’t know if I have been exposed to it.”

She feels, she said, “as if they sent my mother home to die.”

Phoebe Putney is diverting patients to other Georgia hospitals at a rate it has never before approached, transferring 40 in a recent 72-hour period, Mr. Steiner said. But he denied that any gravely ill patients have been sent home.

“Anybody we’ve discharged has been discharged appropriately, clinically,” he said.

Mr. Simmons said that many families are struggling to care for the sick at home, and that for some, a sense of panic has begun to set in.

“Part of the control in life is thinking, if you needed help, you’ve got somewhere to go,” he said. “When that is taken off the table, all sense of control is gone, and hope starts fading.”

He read aloud text messages he received over the weekend. “Please continue to pray,” one said. “My mother, my grandmother and my grandfather have been admitted to the ER with coronavirus symptoms.”

Then, later, “My mother has died.”

For Ms. Johnson, only one person mattered last week.

Her daughter, Tonya M. Thomas, was all she thought of while she was in the hospital. The illness had hit them almost simultaneously, but unaccountably, her 51-year-old daughter was the worst hit, with double pneumonia.

“I was trying to feel better so I could come up here and take care of my daughter,” said Ms. Johnson, an oncology nurse. “I felt like if I hadn’t been in the hospital I could have advocated for her.”

She arrived in time, at 5:45 on Friday afternoon, to be with Ms. Thomas as she died. She called her “a beautiful spirit,” her family’s center. Her best friend.

She unplugged her daughter’s ventilators and removed the IV tubes from her body.

Ms. Thomas’s husband, son and sister were in the room.

“It just hurts so bad, I just don’t understand it,” Ms. Johnson said. “We came together at a funeral of someone we love, and everyone came up and got sick.”

Her daughter’s funeral will be at the graveside, with no more than 10 people present, in accordance with social distancing regulation.

<|endoftext|>

In Florida, one seller was offering 15 N95 face masks on Amazon — for $3,799.

In Massachusetts, a convenience store was selling milk for $10 a gallon.

And in Minnesota, a smoke shop was charging $79.99 for 36 rolls of toilet paper.

Across the country, state attorneys general said this week that they had been flooded with complaints of price gouging and profiteering on items like hand sanitizer, disinfectant wipes and masks that have been in high demand and hard to find on store shelves. Many have also reported a surge in exorbitant price increases on everyday grocery items like chicken, rice and milk.

“This is something, I think, unlike anything we’ve seen in our state,” said Michigan’s attorney general, Dana Nessel, whose office has been inundated by more than 1,880 complaints of potentially illegal price increases — far more than those fielded during previous emergencies like a so-called polar vortex last year and a widespread power failure in 2003.

Ms. Nessel recently assigned a team of special agents to help her respond to the complaints.

“Our staff has been running around the clock,” she said. “It’s been really insane.”

One store had raised the price of lentils and rice by 60 percent, according to Ms. Nessel’s office. Another had opened a box of 10 dust masks that sells for $25 and was reselling them in Ziploc bags for $6 to $10 apiece. Consumers, she said, have also complained of unreasonable price increases on baby formula, diapers, toilet paper and beef.

Some businesses could be prosecuted criminally, officials said, although others were backing down after receiving cease-and-desist letters.

About 40 states have laws against price gouging, some of which were activated by emergency declarations issued by their governors in response to the coronavirus pandemic. Some of those laws define price gouging as an increase above a certain amount — such as 20 percent — since the emergency declaration was issued. Others ban price increases that are not deemed “reasonable.”

On Wednesday, more than 30 state attorneys general sent letters to Facebook, Amazon, Craigslist, eBay and Walmart urging them to crack down on price gouging. The attorneys general argued that it was “especially important” that “unscrupulous sellers do not take advantage of Americans by selling products at unconscionable prices” during the coronavirus pandemic.

“We just don’t want people exploiting others in this time of crisis,” said Maura Healey, the attorney general of Massachusetts, who on March 20 issued an emergency regulation banning “unconscionably high” prices in the state.

Ms. Healey’s office said it had received about 140 complaints of price gouging, including a report of a four-pack of toilet paper selling for $25 on eBay and pharmacies charging $30 for 8 ounces of hand sanitizer.

She said her office was investigating. Violators could be fined $5,000, she said.

“It’s OK to make money,” Ms. Healey said. “It’s OK to make a profit. But there is a line.”

The United States attorney general, William P. Barr, recently directed federal prosecutors across the country to prioritize fraud schemes related to the pandemic and to prosecute offenders.

“If you have a big supply of toilet paper in your house, this is not something you have to worry about,” Mr. Barr said at a White House briefing on Monday. “But if you are sitting on a warehouse full of surgical masks, you will be hearing a knock on your door.”

Amazon said it monitored price changes using manual and automated methods. It said it had removed more than half a million listings for price gouging and had suspended 3,900 sellers. The company said it had also worked with more than 40 attorneys general to hold predatory vendors accountable.

“There is no place for price gouging on Amazon,” the company said in a statement. “We are disappointed that bad actors are attempting to artificially raise prices on basic need products during a global health crisis and, in line with our longstanding policy, have recently blocked or removed hundreds of thousands of offers.”

In many states, regulators said they were racing to investigate the complaints pouring into their consumer hotlines.

New York City officials said Tuesday that they had issued 550 violations and $275,000 in fines to retailers accused of price gouging on items in high demand during the pandemic.

Wisconsin officials said they had sent cease-and-desist letters to 16 businesses suspected of illegally raising prices on N95 masks as well as basic food items like pinto beans, milk, limes, rice, water and cookies.

Kentucky’s attorney general, Daniel Cameron, said his office was scrambling to respond to 1,500 complaints of price gouging, most of them related to masks, hand sanitizer, gloves, wipes, paper towels and toilet paper.

“We’re all hands on deck in our office,” he said.

On Thursday, he issued subpoenas to six Amazon vendors suspected of raising prices by as much as 1,951 percent on essential medical supplies like hand sanitizer and masks. Amazon, he said, worked with his office to identify the top price gougers in Kentucky.

“The subpoenas we issued should serve as a warning to anyone who tries to illegally profit from Covid-19,” he said.

<|endoftext|>

New York will postpone its April 28 presidential primary until June 23, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo announced on Saturday, buying time for the state to administer an election as it struggles to respond to the escalating coronavirus outbreak.

“I don’t think it’s wise to be bringing a lot of people to one location to vote, a lot of people touching one doorknob, a lot of people touching one pen,” Mr. Cuomo said in a news conference. “So we are going to delay that and link it to an election that was previously scheduled on June 23.”

A primary for state legislative and congressional races had already been set for June 23, and now all of the state’s primary elections will be held on the same date, he said.

More than a dozen other states have rescheduled their primary elections as the campaign calendar has been upended by the outbreak, citing guidance from health officials who have urged people to avoid gathering spots, including polling places. Some of those states have switched to voting entirely by mail and have extended deadlines for doing so.

Several others have shifted their primaries to June 2, which has suddenly become a significant date on the Democratic primary calendar. It falls just before a June 9 deadline for voting set by the D.N.C.

Under rules set by the Democratic National Committee, New York risks forfeiting some delegates at the national convention for voting so late in the party’s nomination cycle.

In the past week, it had become apparent that holding New York’s primary as scheduled would be difficult. County elections officials throughout New York had been pressing for a delay, pointing to logistical difficulties tied to the state’s growing coronavirus crisis.

Noting that entry to many traditional polling places had been restricted and that elections employees and volunteers throughout the state had been ordered to remain home, the bipartisan organization representing elections officials in all 62 counties argued that the pandemic had rendered it dangerous to carry out the routine of preparing for an election — visiting polling sites, testing machines and printing ballots.

“Elections board around the state are risking personnel safety and health to prepare for impending elections on April 28,” the Elections Commissions’ Association of the State of New York said in a news release last Tuesday.

Some influential Democrats in New York had privately expressed hope that the election could be avoided all together, pointing out that a decision by Senator Bernie Sanders to withdraw would remove the need for a costly and logistically difficult primary vote.

State Democratic Party chair Jay Jacobs, citing former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr.’s substantial lead in the delegate count, questioned whether Mr. Sanders should continue his campaign absent a legitimate chance for the nomination. “There’s nothing to be gained by keeping the contest going if there’s no reasonable path,” Mr. Jacobs said.

The state’s Republican primary — which would also would have been held on April 28 — had been called off in March after President Trump, the presumptive nominee, was the only candidate who qualified to appear on the ballot.

Had the Democratic primary been canceled, the duty of selecting delegates to the Democratic National Convention would have been left up to the party’s state committee.

The State Board of Elections had explored the possibility of holding New York’s primary entirely by mail, but the board’s staff concluded that county elections offices were not geared up to process huge volumes of mail-in ballots.

<|endoftext|>

When President Trump came to office, he promised a new day with America’s manufacturers, casting himself as the first president who understood their needs. He toured factory floors, often handing out his signature “Make America Great Again” hats.

Yet in the first national crisis that required harnessing American manufacturing ingenuity and ramping up production of ventilators, perhaps the most crucial piece of equipment for patients in crisis, the White House’s ability to gather the power of American industry crumpled.

It was unable to communicate how many ventilators it would need or how quickly it would need them. Mr. Trump set states off on a mad scramble to find their own, leading to bidding wars against one another. Even today it is unclear who is deciding where the new American production will be directed — to the highest bidders or to the cities that need them most.

A week after praising General Motors and a small ventilator manufacturer, Ventec Life Systems, for their voluntary efforts to combine cutting-edge technology with G.M.’s expertise at supply chains and mass production, the president blew up at the largest carmaker in America, accusing its chief executive, Mary T. Barra, of moving too slowly and trying to “rip off” the federal government. In fact, G.M. and Ventec had already signed a partnership — without government help — to ramp up production.

Interviews with White House officials, industry executives and outsiders who tried to intervene make two problems clear. Mr. Trump’s first mistake was recognizing the problem far too late, even though his own medical experts had identified a probable shortage of ventilators as a critical problem in late January, as panic set in that the virus was headed to the United States. Had the president acted sooner, thousands of new ventilators would probably be coming off production lines next month, when they are likely to be desperately needed.

And even after the problem was recognized, and the president’s son-in-law and senior adviser, Jared Kushner, took over the process, both the White House and the Federal Emergency Management Agency struggled to define what was needed, who would pay for it and how to solve the problem of supply chains that stretched across more than a dozen countries.

“We’re going to have plenty,” Mr. Trump said Friday afternoon, declaring that he was invoking the Defense Production Act, a Korean War-era law, to force the companies to make more. But he gave no numbers — and glided past the complexities of getting between 700 and 1,500 components from more than a dozen nations.

“It’s terrific that the administration is now beginning to use the D.P.A.,” said Joshua Gotbaum, a former defense official in the Clinton administration who often made use of the Defense Production Act. “Had they started two months ago, we would already have ventilators, masks and other critical equipment in mass production.”

“It is one thing to know that there should be a central national effort,” Mr. Gotbaum added. “It is quite another to accept the responsibility for the shortcomings and mistakes that will inevitably occur with it.”

“If we don’t flatten the curve, we’re on a trajectory currently to exceed our capacity in the New Orleans area for ventilators by about April the 4th, and all beds available in hospitals by about April the 10th,” Gov. John Bel Edwards, Democrat of Louisiana, said Sunday on “Meet the Press on NBC. “So we’re doing everything we can to surge capacity. It’s very difficult.”

Industry executives made the point that while the Defense Production Act enabled the White House to create the illusion of decisive executive action, it did not solve the nuts-and-bolts problem of gearing up scores of suppliers or creating Made-in-America production lines where few exist. That is the problem G.M. and Ventec, and other companies involved in the effort like Ford and Medtronic, are facing — often seeking parts from the same suppliers.

“We are moving full steam ahead on ventilators because they know there is an immediate need for increased production,” said Chris Brooks, Ventec’s chief strategy officer, even if it is still unclear whether the customers are hospitals, states or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, which the White House has delegated to take charge of the effort.

Mr. Trump came to this crisis belatedly, but once he did he has tried to portray himself as a wartime president, one who is making use of all of America’s talents to fight an invisible but devastating enemy. And in that regard, the best analogy may be Franklin D. Roosevelt’s “arsenal of democracy,” the phrase he used in a Dec. 29, 1940, fireside chat, as he tried to get American industry to support Britain in its fight with Nazi Germany, without getting the United States into the war.

It turned out to be prescient, because industry was already getting onto a wartime footing by the time Japan attacked Pearl Harbor a year later, plunging the United States into a manufacturing frenzy. That is when Ford began churning out B-24 bombers and Sherman tanks.

But in this case, Mr. Trump sought the language of wartime action without the responsibility for making it happen. He welcomed voluntary efforts that were already underway, as manufacturers like Medtronic and the Dutch manufacturing giant Philips promised to ramp up production. The problem was that it was uncoordinated — as if the Pentagon had announced it needed more missiles, more artillery shells and more nuclear weapons but left unclear how many or where they should be delivered.

That was the situation Mr. Kushner found when he entered the effort, at the request of Vice President Mike Pence. He moved the authority to deal with the issue from the Department of Health and Human Services to FEMA, saying that the latter agency knew how to act in a “battle rhythm.” But still, no one knew how many ventilators were already in the market, where they would be needed first or how many more companies could be expected to make. And it was complicated by the fact that many of the largest manufacturers had moved operations offshore, to Ireland, Switzerland and, of course, China.

Along came G.M. and Ventec, a partnership Mr. Trump celebrated in a tweet a week ago. But all week the details languished. Early hopes that the company could produce 20,000 ventilators quickly began to fade; in the first few weeks, the figure was more like 5,000. And that production would not begin until late April, if everything went perfectly.

Still, a small group of White House officials briefed on the discussion anticipated that it would go ahead, a welcome announcement after weeks of headlines about the administration’s halting response to the spread of the coronavirus.

One administration official said that Mr. Trump had not been briefed on the details of the G.M.-Ventec deal, and that he was caught by surprise when he read a New York Times article about how the announcement was being held up while FEMA examined competing offers.

Instead of focusing on why the deal had been abruptly stopped, officials said, the president was enraged about the prospect of G.M. — which was actually Ventec’s subcontractor — trying to get money upfront from the government to fund suppliers. And aides told him that the company’s estimates of how many ventilators could be made in a relatively short period of time had shifted when G.M. officials were pressed.

So the president posted a series of tweets denouncing the company and its chief executive, urging them to build ventilators at a Lordstown, Ohio, plant that had been closed. (G.M. sold the plant last year and will be making ventilators in Kokomo, Ind., an electronics plant that has the clean rooms needed for manufacturing medical parts.)

Mr. Trump decided to go ahead and compel G.M. to manufacture the ventilators, but far fewer than the original deal envisioned. His attitude, officials said, was that since reporters had been pushing him on deploying the Defense Production Act, he would give them what they wanted — without giving G.M. the full deal. And then he named other firms that would also be tapped by FEMA.

But by the end of the weekend, it was still unclear what the production targets were or even if FEMA had issued any contracts. The companies did not know if Washington would take responsibility for distributing the ventilators.

In the Rose Garden on Sunday afternoon, Mr. Trump for the first time began to acknowledge the complexity of the undertaking American industry was just now beginning. “They are very complex,” he said of the machines. “You know, this is like building a car.”

<|endoftext|>

Good morning.

(Don’t get California Today by email? Here’s the sign-up.)

California hit grim milestones on Tuesday, as the number of cases in the Bay Area topped 1,000 and Los Angeles County officials said that a teenager’s death was linked to the virus; if the cause of death is confirmed as the coronavirus, he would be one of the youngest victims of the outbreak in the country.

All of that took place against the backdrop of mass layoffs and what state officials have described as a surge in applications for benefits. On Wednesday, Gov. Gavin Newsom said that 1 million Californians had filed for unemployment since March 13.

We asked Sharon Terman, the director of the Work and Family Program and senior staff attorney at the nonprofit Legal Aid at Work, about what Californians who have been directly affected by the Covid-19 outbreak should know.

What benefits are Californians eligible for if they’ve been laid off or lost hours because of Covid-19?

Those workers can apply for unemployment insurance through the Employment Development Department (E.D.D.), which has waived the usual one-week waiting period. That means workers who are unemployed or underemployed as a result of the coronavirus should be able to receive benefits starting the first day of lost hours or work, though given the volume of claims it will likely take at least three weeks to receive your benefits.

To get benefits, you must meet certain minimum requirements. If your claim is approved, you can receive between $40 and $450 each week, depending on your earnings. Under the federal Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act, enacted on March 27, you may be able to receive an additional $600 per week, on top of the regular benefit amount, through the end of July. And unemployment insurance benefits will be extended for up to 39 weeks.



Under the CARES Act, independent contractors may be eligible for Unemployment Insurance as well as the additional $600 per week.

If you’re a parent whose child’s school has been canceled, what options do you have for taking leave from work?

Beginning April 1 through Dec. 31, under the federal Families First Coronavirus Response Act, eligible employees can receive 10 paid sick days and 10 more weeks of extended paid leave when a parent cannot work because of the closure of a child’s school or child care because of Covid-19. Employers must provide two-thirds pay during this time, up to $200 per day, and private employers can receive refundable tax credits.

[Read more on who is excluded and what benefits are included.]

Workers in California may also be eligible for paid sick days that can be used during school closures under state law, which provides a minimum of three days with full pay. Local laws may provide more.

Additionally, the California Family School Partnership Act entitles workers at employers with 25 or more employees to up to 40 hours of job-protected, unpaid leave per year in a child care emergency, including the closure or unavailability of a school or child care provider.

Beyond paid sick days and paid leave, you can apply for unemployment insurance if you need to care for a child whose school is closed, and you’ve exhausted other options for care. Under the CARES Act, unemployment insurance benefits can last up to 39 weeks and will include a $600 boost over regular payments through July.



If your child (or another close family member) is sick with Covid-19 or another serious health condition, you can apply for California Paid Family Leave (P.F.L.) to take care of them. P.F.L. provides 60 percent or 70 percent of your wages, depending on income, for six weeks (extended to eight weeks, beginning July 1), and there is no waiting period.

How do you apply for benefits through the state?

You can apply for unemployment insurance online, or by mailing or faxing the application to the Employment Development Department (Spanish version here). You may also apply by phone, but expect long wait times.

Here is a checklist of all the information you’ll need to apply. If it takes you more than five business days to connect by phone, ask the E.D.D. to backdate your claim to the Sunday before you started calling; just keep documentation of your attempts (like screenshots of your call log).

The best way to apply for Paid Family Leave is online, using State Disability Insurance (S.D.I.) Online. The E.D.D. also accepts P.F.L. applications by mail, but you have to request that a hard copy be mailed to you (unlike with unemployment insurance, which allows you to mail or fax a form printed from the E.D.D.’s website).

[Here’s more on what you need for your application].

The Employment Development Department also will require a medical certification or written order from a state or local health officer documenting that your family member is infected with or suspected of being infected with Covid-19. Covered family members include children, parents, parents-in-law, siblings, grandparents and grandchildren. Doctors can upload a certification to the E.D.D. if you apply for benefits online. Otherwise, they have to fill out a portion of the hard copy form.

Employees who are sick with Covid-19 can apply for S.D.I. benefits online or by mail. State Disability Insurance provides the same pay rate as Paid Family Leave (60 or 70 percent of your income, up to a cap of $1,300 per week), and can continue for 52 weeks, with no waiting period for coronavirus-related claims. To apply, you will need a certification from a doctor documenting your condition, or a written order from a state or local health officer stating that you have (or are suspected of having) Covid-19.

Although you cannot claim unemployment insurance, S.D.I. and P.F.L. at the same time, you can use these benefits consecutively.

For more information about your workplace rights related to coronavirus, see Legal Aid at Work’s F.A.Q. or contact its virtual Workers’ Rights Clinic at (415) 404-9093 for a free, confidential consultation.

As an employer, what am I required to provide for my employees if they need to take sick time or care for a relative because of Covid-19?

Effective April 1 through Dec. 31, the federal Families First Coronavirus Response Act will require government employers and private employers with fewer than 500 employees to provide 10 paid sick days to workers to address their own Covid-19 illness, mandatory self-isolation or quarantine (at 100 percent pay, up to $511 per day).

[Read more on how much you can get, and what employers are exempt.]

All employers in California also must provide at least three paid sick days at full pay, and employers in several localities are required to provide more. Paid sick days can be used for an employee’s own illness or a family member’s, including preventive care.

Under California law, employers with at least 50 employees must provide up to 12 weeks of job-protected leave, with continued health benefits, to an employee who is seriously ill or who needs to care for a seriously ill parent, minor or adult dependent child, spouse or registered domestic partner. Employees are eligible if they have been on the job for one year and have worked 1,250 hours in the year before their leave begins.

California Today goes live at 6:30 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com. Were you forwarded this email? Sign up for California Today here and read every edition online here.

Jill Cowan grew up in Orange County, graduated from U.C. Berkeley and has reported all over the state, including the Bay Area, Bakersfield and Los Angeles — but she always wants to see more. Follow along here or on Twitter, @jillcowan.

California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and graduated from U.C. Berkeley.

<|endoftext|>

President Trump on Thursday sent a letter to governors that said the federal government hoped to provide a risk assessment for individual counties as testing capabilities for the novel coronavirus expand.

Counties will be classified as high, medium or low risk, the president wrote, to help local policymakers make decisions about whether to maintain, increase or relax social distancing measures. Many states, including California and New York, have issued orders asking residents to stay at home except for essential travel.

“This will incorporate robust surveillance testing, which allows us to monitor the spread of the virus throughout the country,” Mr. Trump wrote.

The United States economy has been hit hard by the closure of retail stores, restaurants, movie theaters and many small businesses. More than three million people filed for unemployment benefits last week, by far the worst week on record. Mr. Trump has said he would like to reopen the country by Easter, although health experts warn that the virus is still spreading.

Read the full letter here:

<|endoftext|>

Hours after the United States became the nation with the largest number of reported coronavirus cases on Thursday, President Trump appeared on Fox News and expressed doubt about shortages of medical supplies, boasted about the country’s testing capacity, and criticized his predecessor’s response to an earlier outbreak of a different disease.

“I don’t believe you need 40,000 or 30,000 ventilators,” he said, alluding to a request by Gov. Andrew Cuomo of New York. The president made the statement in spite of government reports predicting shortages in a severe pandemic — and he reversed course on Friday morning, calling for urgent steps to produce more ventilators.

Speaking on Fox on Thursday, Mr. Trump suggested wrongly that because of his early travel restrictions on China, “a lot of the people decided to go to Italy instead” — though Italy had issued a more wide-ranging ban on travel from China and done so earlier than the United States. And at a White House briefing on Friday, he wrongly said he was the “first one” to impose restrictions on China. North Korea, for one, imposed restrictions 10 days before the United States.

He misleadingly claimed again on Friday that “we’ve tested now more than anybody.” In terms of raw numbers, the United States has tested more people for the coronavirus than Italy and South Korea but still lags behind in tests per capita.

And he continued to falsely claim that the Obama administration “acted very, very late” during the H1N1 epidemic in 2009 and 2010.

These falsehoods, like dozens of others from the president since January, demonstrate some core tenets of how Mr. Trump has tried to spin his response to the coronavirus epidemic to his advantage. Here’s an overview.

When the first case of the virus was reported in the United States in January, Mr. Trump dismissed it as “one person coming in from China.” He said the situation was “under control” and “it’s going to be just fine” — despite a top official from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention telling the public to “expect more cases.”

No matter how much the count of cases has grown, Mr. Trump has characterized it as low.

“We have very little problem in this country” with five cases, he said in late January.

He maintained the same dismissive tone on March 5, as the number of cases had grown by a factor of 25. “Only 129 cases,” he wrote on Twitter.

A day later, he falsely claimed that this was “lower than just about” any other country. (A number of developed countries like Australia, Britain and Canada as well as populous India had fewer reported cases at that point.)

By March 12, when the tally had again increased tenfold to over 1,200, the president argued that too was “very few cases” compared to other countries.

He has also misleadingly suggested numerous times that the coronavirus is no worse than the flu, saying on Friday, “You call it germ, you can call it a flu. You can call it a virus. You can call it many different names. I’m not sure anybody knows what it is.”

The mortality rate for coronavirus, however, is 10 times that of the flu and no vaccine or cure exists yet for the coronavirus.

In conflating the flu and the coronavirus, Mr. Trump repeatedly emphasized the annual number of deaths from the flu, and occasionally inflated his estimates. When he first made the comparison in February, he talked of flu deaths from “25,000 to 69,000.” In March, he cited a figure “as high as 100,000” in 1990.

The actual figure for the 1990 flu season was 33,000, and in the past decade, the flu has killed an estimated 12,000 to 61,000 people each flu season in the United States. That’s so far higher than the death count for the virus in the United States, but below projections from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which estimated that deaths from Covid-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus, could range from 200,000 to 1.7 million. As of Friday evening, more than 1,200 deaths in the United States have been linked to the coronavirus.

On the flip side, Mr. Trump inflated the mortality and infection rates of other deadly diseases as if to emphasize that the coronavirus pales in comparison. “The level of death with Ebola,” according to Mr. Trump, “was a virtual 100 percent.” (The average fatality rate is around 50 percent.) During the 1918 flu pandemic, “you had a 50/50 chance or very close of dying,” he said on Tuesday. (Estimates for the fatality rate for the 1918 flu are far below that.)

This week, as cities and states began locking down, stock markets tumbled and jobless claims hit record levels, Mr. Trump again played down the impact of the pandemic and said, with no evidence and contrary to available research, that a recession would be deadlier than the coronavirus.

The president has also dispensed a steady stream of optimism when discussing countermeasures against the virus.

From later February to early March, Mr. Trump repeatedly promised that a vaccine would be available “relatively soon” despite being told by public health officials and pharmaceutical executives that the process would take 12 to 18 months. Later, he promoted treatments that were still unproven against the virus, and suggested that they were “approved” and available though they were not.

Outside of medical interventions, Mr. Trump has exaggerated his own policies and the contributions of the private sector in fighting the outbreak. For example, he imprecisely described a website developed by a company affiliated with Google, wrongly said that insurers were covering the cost of treatment for Covid-19 when they only agreed to waive co-payments for testing, and prematurely declared that automakers were making ventilators “right now.”

Often, he has touted his complete “shut down” or “closing” of the United States to visitors from affected countries (in some cases leading to confusion and chaos). But the restrictions he has imposed on travel from China, Iran and 26 countries in Europe do not amount to a ban or closure of the borders. Those restrictions do not apply to American citizens, permanent residents, their immediate families, or flight crews.

Not only were these restrictions total and absolute in Mr. Trump’s telling, they were also imposed on China “against the advice of a lot of professionals, and we turned out to be right.” His health and human services secretary, however, has previously said that the restrictions were imposed on the recommendations of career health officials. The Times has also reported that Mr. Trump was skeptical before deciding to back the restrictions at the urging of some aides.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention sent test kits to states in February, some of which were flawed and produced inconclusive readings. Problems continued to grow as scientists and state officials warned about restrictions on who could be tested and the availability of tests overall. Facing criticism over testing and medical supplies, Mr. Trump instead shifted responsibility to a variety of others.

It was the Obama administration that “made a decision on testing that turned out to be very detrimental to what we’re doing,” he said on March 4. This was a misleading reference to draft guidance issued in 2014 on regulating laboratory-developed tests, one that was never finalized or enforceable. A law enacted in 2004 created the process and requirements for receiving authorization to use unapproved testing products in health emergencies.

The test distributed by the World Health Organization was never offered to the United States and was “a bad test,” according to Mr. Trump. It’s true that the United States typically designs and manufactures its own diagnostics, but there is no evidence that the W.H.O. test was unreliable.

As for the shortage of ventilators cited by Mr. Cuomo, Mr. Trump has misleadingly said that the governor declined to address the issue in 2015 when he “had the chance to buy, in 2015, 16,000 ventilators at a very low price and he turned it down.”

A 2015 report establishing New York’s guidelines on ventilator allocation estimated that, in the event of a pandemic on the scale of the 1918 flu, the state would “likely have a shortfall of 15,783 ventilators during peak demand.” But the report did not actually recommend increasing the stockpile and noted that purchasing more was not a cure-all solution as there would not be enough trained health care workers to operate them.

Since the severity of the pandemic became apparent, the president has defended his earlier claims through false statements and revisionism.

He has denied saying things he said. Pressed on Tuesday about his pronouncements in March that testing was “perfect,” Mr. Trump said he had been simply referring to the conversation he had in July with the president of Ukraine that ultimately led to the House impeaching him. In fact, he had said “the tests are all perfect” like the phone call.

He has compared his government’s response to the current coronavirus pandemic (“one of the best”) favorably to the Obama administration’s response to the H1N1 epidemic of 2009 to 2010 (“a full scale disaster”). In doing so, Mr. Trump has falsely claimed that former President Barack Obama did not declare the epidemic an emergency until thousands had died (a public health emergency was declared days before the first reported death in the United States) and falsely said the previous administration “didn’t do testing” (they did).

At times, Mr. Trump has marveled at the scale of the pandemic, arguing that “nobody would ever believe a thing like that’s possible” and that it “snuck up on us.”

There have been a number of warnings about both a generic worldwide pandemic and the coronavirus specifically. A 2019 government report said that “the United States and the world will remain vulnerable to the next flu pandemic or large scale outbreak of a contagious disease.” A simulation conducted last year by the Department of Health and Human Services modeled an outbreak of a rapidly spreading virus. And top government officials began sounding the alarms about the coronavirus in early January.

Despite his history of false and misleading remarks, Mr. Trump has also asserted, “I felt it was a pandemic long before it was called a pandemic.”

<|endoftext|>

— Smita Nadia Hussein, a mother of two, who gave birth on March 17 in Morristown, N.J.

[This article is a partnership between The New York Times and The Fuller Project. In Her Words is available as a newsletter. Sign up here to get it delivered to your inbox.]

On Wednesday, March 18, 28-year-old Latoyha Young and her mother, Thomasina Hayten, rushed to Sutter Health Hospital in Sacramento, believing that Young was in labor. Hospital staff sent her home — she wasn’t far enough along.

Two days later, Young spent her expected due date searching stores in Sacramento for key items: baby wipes, diapers and hand sanitizer.

The mother-and-daughter pair, who are homeless, dependent on city transportation and have been staying temporarily with a relative, needed supplies before a shelter-in-place order that went into effect on Monday. They found wipes, but no diapers.

That evening, they returned to the hospital, but were sent home. Young was only two centimeters dilated, rather than the five to six centimeters that would indicate active labor.

Nothing seemed to be going right.

The plan had been for Young to be accompanied during childbirth by a community doula, funded by a grant through Sacramentos’s Black Child Legacy Campaign. But when Young’s doula, Joy Dean, drove them to another hospital — one of the few that accepts her Medi-Cal plan, California’s Medicaid program — the new limits on visitors permitted in labor and delivery departments in an attempt to contain the spread of Covid-19 meant that she was unable to accompany them inside.

“I’m not worried about the virus. I’m worried about going back and they’re not listening to me,” said Young, adding that if Dean had been with her, they might have treated her differently.

As the United States struggles to respond to the Covid-19 crisis, tens of thousands of women across the country are giving birth in unprecedented circumstances. Hospitals are shifting their prenatal and postpartum care to telemedicine, limiting or outright banning visitors, offering elective inductions to full-term mothers and converting labor and delivery wards to coronavirus units.

These changes are leaving health care providers, industry associations and patients reeling as they try to make informed decisions. “It’s changing day by day,” said Thorild Urdal, a nurse in the San Francisco Bay Area with almost 35 years of experience in labor and delivery.

Coronavirus is straining a U.S. health care system that, for years, has had the worst maternal mortality rate in the developed world. In 2007, 12.7 of every 100,000 women died during pregnancy, labor or within 42 days of giving birth, the measurement set by the World Health Organization. In 2018, that number had risen to 17.4 deaths per 100,000, according to data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Health outcomes are even worse for women of color, especially black mothers, with C.D.C. data showing that in 2018, black mothers died at twice the rate of white mothers. Other studies suggest that the C.D.C.’s numbers are conservative, and that black mothers are dying at 3.3 times the rate of white mothers.

With this kind of maternal health baseline, many birth workers are concerned that efforts to contain the coronavirus pandemic will have unintended consequences on mothers and infants that will only become visible after the pandemic ends.

Meanwhile, hospitals are struggling to keep up.

Last week, the Permanente Medical Group, Kaiser Permanente’s Northern California network, which collectively delivers 45,000 babies a year, became the first major hospital group to offer induced labor to women at 39 weeks, which is considered a full-term pregnancy, or offer earlier dates for women with already-scheduled inductions. Typically, it is only offered for medical reasons at 39 weeks.

The network is intentionally “trying to get patients delivered before this pandemic gets worse, as long as they are past 39 weeks,” said Dr. Amanda Williams, the head of ob-gyn at Kaiser Permanente Oakland in California. That way, they can “get delivered and get back home before they get sick, their partner gets sick and staff gets constricted.”

“We cannot force anyone to have an induction,” Williams added, “but we can very strongly recommend it if this continues to get worse.”

For Jhoanna Galvez, a licensed midwife based in Los Angeles, induced labor is the last thing that she would recommend during a pandemic, “because it may actually increase time in the hospital,” she said, and “if you induce and you’re there for 72 hours, you’ve defeated the purpose.” (Studies consistently show that induced labor lengthens the birth process compared with non-induced labor.)

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists has not yet issued guidelines on the matter, but a spokesperson said induction is “under discussion.”

Separately, the college noted that while pregnant women are not more susceptible to Covid-19 than the general population, symptoms of the disease like upper respiratory infection and high fever can affect infant health.

And while early studies from Wuhan, China, suggest the virus does not transmit vertically (for example, during delivery), for mothers who test positive, or are presumed positive, U.S. hospitals may separate them from their infants for a 14-day quarantine period — whether in a separate room or by a barrier in the same room.

Complicating matters, some hospital systems are shuttering labor and delivery wards entirely to keep beds clear for coronavirus patients.

In San Francisco, the California Pacific Medical Center network of hospitals converted one of its two labor and delivery units into a Covid-19 unit. Women in labor (with no symptoms of coronavirus) are now sent to another hospital in the network. This change, however, has not been publicly announced.

Urdal, the Bay Area nurse, said that while consolidating birth centers in the face of a pandemic “sounds good in theory,” in practice it doesn’t work well because when women are in labor, “the vast majority simply show up. And it’s not in any way prudent to move a woman in active labor.”

And then there’s the visitors dilemma.

NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital and other city hospitals have banned all visitors from labor and delivery wards in an attempt to stop the spread of coronavirus from asymptomatic carriers. And at hospitals which allow just one visitor, mothers are facing the almost impossible choice of who to have by their side: a partner or a doula. Studies have shown that the presence of doulas improve both mother and infant health outcomes, regardless of race.

“Oftentimes people are seeking support because they’re already emotionally, financially vulnerable,” said Galvez, the Los Angeles-based midwife. “So already they’re saying, ‘I need support for this incredibly vulnerable thing, and that’s not going to be available.’”

Smita Nadia Hussein, a mother of two, gave birth on March 17 in Morristown, N.J., accompanied by just her husband, rather than her support network of mother, sister and doula. “I didn’t feel like it was unfair of the hospital. I thought it was unfair of the universe,” she said, adding, “It sucks, it really sucks.”

The issue of support doesn’t end in the delivery room: Casey Hogle, a first-time mother who delivered at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston on March 14, said that while delivery went smoothly, being at home highlighted other challenges. “The biggest impact is a social impact,” she shared, her voice wavering. “Both of our moms are probably not going to see the baby for quite some time now.”

That social support is especially important for people who have already been marginalized by the U.S. health care system.

Williams, of Kaiser Permanente Oakland, acknowledged that her hospital’s policies and the disproportionate effect that they have on women of color and at-risk people are adding countless layers of stress in an already uncertain time.

“The marginalized just become more marginalized when there is stress on the system,” she said. But, she added, “These are extraordinary times, and we’ve had to take extraordinary measures.”

Kathryn Hall-Trujillo, founder of Birthing Project USA, which focuses on improving black maternal health outcomes, added that many people already distrust the health care system, which they see as racially biased. “We have spent a lot of time convincing black women their link to survival in the health care system is their doula,” Hall-Trujillo said. Now they don’t even have that.

Instead, women like Latoyha Young are doing their best to navigate the health care system — and a city under virtual lockdown — by themselves.

As of Thursday, Young was still waiting to go into active labor, and still has not found diapers. When the time comes to push, Thomasina Hayten refuses to leave her daughter’s side, regardless of hospital policies. She doesn’t want her daughter to give birth alone.

“If they [want to] cite me for it, they can cite me,” Hayten said. “Because she’s not going to do this herself.”

The crisis has led some mothers to consider giving birth at home instead of at the hospital, where over 98 percent of all American births still take place.

Galvez has received five to eight new inquiries per day from mothers with due dates in the next two weeks who are interested in home births, a huge increase from her usual three clients per month.

But Dr. Taraneh Shirazian, president and founder of Saving Mothers, a nonprofit focused on maternal health globally, and an ob-gyn at NYU-Langone Medical Center, stresses that hospital births are still the safest option, given both the high risks of complications in labor, as well as the additional logistical challenges that a pandemic presents.

“When any system is under stress, it’s going to slow the process,” she explained, so it’s best to be in the hospital already, where you can get access to care quickly.

Eileen Guo is a California-based contributing reporter with The Fuller Project, a journalism nonprofit that reports on global issues impacting women. Francesca Donner and Alisha Haridasani Gupta contributed reporting. 

<|endoftext|>

SEATTLE — The Seattle area, home of the first known coronavirus case in the United States and the place where the virus claimed 37 of its first 50 victims, is now seeing evidence that strict containment strategies, imposed in the earliest days of the outbreak, are beginning to pay off — at least for now.

Deaths are not rising as fast as they are in other states. Dramatic declines in street traffic show that people are staying home. Hospitals have so far not been overwhelmed. And preliminary statistical models provided to public officials in Washington State suggest that the spread of the virus has slowed in the Seattle area in recent days.

While each infected person was spreading the virus to an average of 2.7 other people earlier in March, that number appears to have dropped, with one projection suggesting that it was now down to 1.4.

The researchers who are preparing the latest projections, led by the Institute for Disease Modeling, a private research group in Bellevue, Wash., have been watching a variety of data points since the onset of the outbreak. They include tens of thousands of coronavirus test results, deaths, and mobility information — including traffic patterns and the movements of anonymous Facebook users — to estimate the rate at which coronavirus patients are spreading the disease to others.

The progress is precarious, and the data, which was still being analyzed and has yet to be published, is uncertain. Officials said that expansive social distancing policies will remain a key part of daily life for weeks to come.

But the findings offer a measure of hope that the emergency measures that have disrupted life in much of the nation can be effective in slowing the spread of the disease.

“We made a huge impact — we slowed the transmission,” Seattle’s mayor, Jenny Durkan, said in an interview. She cautioned that any lifting of restrictions would bring a quick rise in new cases, and that she expected distancing requirements to continue in some form for months.

“There is evidence that doing the aggressive measures can have a benefit,” Gov. Jay Inslee said in an interview, discussing the overall numbers he is seeing.

But the governor said that the state was far from turning a corner. While there are indications of improvement, he said, he has also seen numbers in the last few days that still have him worried, including a rise in positive test results statewide and the emergence of new cases in rural areas.

He said more restrictions may yet be needed, and that the state is not “within 1,000 miles of declaring victory.”

“It would be grossly irresponsible to stop these measures now,” Mr. Inslee said.

President Trump said on Sunday that the federal government’s guidelines for social distancing would remain in place until April 30, backing down from his previous comments that he hoped the country could go back to work by Easter.

Mr. Trump had clashed with public health experts around the country when he suggested that the guidelines — which urge people to stay at home and not to gather in groups of more than 10 — might be relaxed by April 12.

Washington State, which enacted some of the nation’s earliest and most stringent containment policies, has continued to see its death toll climb: The state recorded 23 deaths on Friday, the most in a single day since the outbreak began; 16 were in King County, which includes Seattle. All told, Washington State has had 4,319 confirmed coronavirus cases through Sunday.

The largest outbreak in the country is now in New York, which reported 237 deaths on Sunday, the state’s deadliest day so far. The number of confirmed cases there jumped by 7,200, reaching 59,513. More than half — 33,768 — were in New York City, where hospitals and the city’s 911 system have been overwhelmed.

“I don’t think there’s any way to look at those numbers,” Gov. Andrew Cuomo of New York said, “without seeing thousands of people pass away.”

With so many states now deep in crisis, the signs of provisional success in the Seattle area offer a lesson for other cities and regions that are just beginning to see the onset of the coronavirus: Early and aggressive action to contain the spread may help lower the trajectory of a virus that could otherwise overwhelm health systems.

Officials in Washington State first began to plead with people to keep their distance from one another at the end of February, after discovering that the virus had infected people in the Seattle area with no known exposure or history of foreign travel, followed by an outbreak at a suburban nursing home now linked to dozens of deaths.

Within a week, the county was asking organizations to consider postponing large events and for people to work from home if possible. People over 60 were encouraged to remain indoors. Some of the region’s major employers, including the headquarters campuses of Amazon and Microsoft, responded by encouraging workers to work from home, quieting workplace hubs that would otherwise be bustling during commutes and lunchtime.

The demographics of those workplaces, with tens of thousands of tech workers who were able to telecommute, may have given the region an early edge in keeping people separated. Perhaps the city’s social norms helped, too, as local residents have long had a reputation for keeping to themselves or within circles of longtime friends — a phenomenon often explained to newcomers as the Seattle Freeze.

Ms. Durkan said the region also benefited from a robust network of researchers who were able to do early modeling to assess the reach of the virus in the community. Without that, she said, policymakers may not have taken the drastic steps to shut down the city as quickly as they did.

The region has also benefited from more widespread testing than most states, helping feed data to the researchers’ models and give a sense of how much infection might be missed.

After scientists found evidence that the virus had been circulating weeks before some of the earliest cases were identified, researchers from local groups, led by the Institute for Disease Modeling, began looking at what it would take to slow the progress of the virus. On March 10, they developed projections showing that significant changes in human-to-human contact would be needed to avert hundreds more deaths by April 8.

That projection helped guide a series of actions: The next day, on March 11, Mr. Inslee banned events of 250 people in three Seattle-area counties — a measure that was soon adopted across the state and by other governors — and the Seattle Public Schools announced they would close.

Mr. Inslee warned at the time how drastically life needed to change, saying it was unacceptable for people to be crammed close together at bars and other settings; the restrictions, he said, were going to be “profoundly disturbing to a lot of the ways that we live our lives.”

That same day, with case numbers also rising in New York, Mayor Bill de Blasio was not yet endorsing such limits. “People should go out and continue to live life, should go out to restaurants,” Mr. de Blasio said.

Over the following days, both Washington and New York states adopted increasingly stringent restrictions, closing schools, bars and restaurants and ultimately issuing stay-at-home orders.

Washington State’s coronavirus figures have continued to grow steadily, but not as fast as other states’. The death toll has been doubling about every eight days in Washington, compared with every two or three days in New York, Michigan, New Jersey and Louisiana.

Hospitals in Washington have yet to be overrun, although there are continuing concerns about supply shortages and worries that growing caseloads could still become a problem.

While the restrictions have apparently helped slow the virus, they have devastated businesses, in particular restaurants and hotels. The Space Needle is closed. Pike Place Market’s breezeways are largely barren. As in other parts of the country, unemployment claims have soared.

Ubah Dahraan, who drives for Uber and Lyft in Seattle, said she began seeing business decline in the first week of March, well before the major mandates imposed by state and local leaders, as city residents started to stay home voluntarily.

A single mother with three teenagers living in her apartment, Ms. Dahraan said the family doesn’t go outside now, focusing instead on prayer, cooking, reading, and keeping in touch with friends by phone. Originally from Somalia, Ms. Dahraan said she hears every day from relatives who are worried about her, including those whom Ms. Dahraan has supported financially in the past.

“One said, ‘I wish I could help send you money to pay bills. This time it’s your turn,’” Ms. Dahraan said.

Dr. Jeff Duchin, who is Health Officer for the regional health agency, Public Health Seattle and King County, said that while the region is seeing positive effects of social distancing measures, there are still significant numbers of new cases developing. He said the area not only needs to continue the current measures, it should also watch to see whether additional containment efforts are needed.

“The threat of a rebound that could overwhelm the health care system remains, and will remain for the foreseeable future, if we let up too soon,” Dr. Duchin said.

Many of the Seattle area’s cases surfaced in the suburb of Kirkland, at EvergreenHealth Medical Center, which has handled some 246 confirmed cases and 47 deaths.

Dr. Jeff Tomlin, the medical center’s chief executive, said on Sunday that the number of cases there has remained steady in recent weeks. At times when the hospital’s intensive care unit has neared capacity, he said, it has been able to turn to other nearby hospitals for help.

“It would seem for now that it appears manageable, but I would be very hesitant to make any predictions,” Dr. Tomlin said.

In other parts of the state, concerns are still growing. Dr. Marty Brueggemann, the chief medical officer at Virginia Mason Memorial in Yakima, a city in central Washington, said his hospital is just starting to see cases arrive. While only about 100 cases have been confirmed in the area so far, Dr. Brueggemann said he expects that there are thousands more that are undetected, and that those who eventually need hospitalization may not reach that point for days yet.

Dr. Brueggemann projects that in the next two weeks his hospital may find itself without enough ventilators. But he said he was encouraged by what he has seen in Seattle.

“A lot of us are crossing our fingers and hoping that maybe, maybe, maybe we’ve done some good here,” Dr. Brueggemann said. “We’re not ready to let our guard down.”

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — President Trump retreated Sunday from his desire to relax coronavirus guidelines by Easter, announcing instead that all Americans must continue to avoid nonessential travel, going to work, eating at bars and restaurants, or gathering in groups of more than 10 for at least another month and perhaps until June.

The grim recommendation, which the president made in the White House Rose Garden, came just a day before the end of a two-week period in which the world’s largest economy has largely shut down with staggering consequences: businesses shuttered, schools and colleges emptied, and social life all but suspended.

Mr. Trump said repeatedly last week that he wanted to reverse such drastic measures soon, perhaps by Easter, on April 12, in the hopes of restarting the economy. But public health experts — including the president’s own advisers — had warned that trying to return to normal life too quickly risked allowing the virus to rage, increasing the likelihood of more infections and raising the number of deaths.

The president finally appeared on Sunday to acknowledge the possibility of deaths on a large scale and back down from weeks of insisting that the threat from the virus might be overblown. In the past month, Mr. Trump has vacillated between accepting the need for aggressive action to limit the pandemic and complaining that such moves will harm the economy.

But on Sunday, his mood seemed somber as he conceded the need for another month of collective pain. Citing figures from his advisers that showed that as many as 200,000 people could die from the virus even if the country took aggressive action to slow its spread, Mr. Trump said the restrictions must continue, even if it meant more sacrifice in the days ahead.

“During this period, it’s very important that everyone strongly follow the guidelines. Have to follow the guidelines,” Mr. Trump told reporters, with members of the government’s coronavirus task force nearby. “Therefore, we will be extending our guidelines to April 30 to slow the spread.”

“We can expect that by June 1, we will be well on our way to recovery,” Mr. Trump said. “We think by June 1. A lot of great things will be happening.”

Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the nation’s leading infectious disease expert, said he and other public health officials had urged Mr. Trump not to relax the guidelines too soon. Dr. Fauci — who in television appearances earlier in the day had offered the estimate of 200,000 dead — said Mr. Trump was affected by those predictions.

“The idea that we may have these many cases played a role in our decision in trying to make sure that we don’t do something prematurely and pull back when we should be pushing,” Dr. Fauci said. He said extending the guidelines until April 30 was a “wise and prudent decision” that Mr. Trump reached after discussions over several days with Dr. Deborah L. Birx, the coordinator of the effort to fight the virus, and other health officials.

“Dr. Birx and I spent a considerable amount of time going over all the data, why we felt this was a best choice for us, and the president accepted it,” Dr. Fauci said.

Aides said that Mr. Trump was muted during the task force meeting before Sunday’s news conference, his mind almost entirely made up to extend the guidelines. One adviser said the president recognized that the data about the potential impact of the virus in the United States was bad, and could not be bent to his will.

For weeks, Mr. Trump had compared the coronavirus to the flu, repeatedly suggesting that many more people die of the flu each year than would succumb to the virus. But on Sunday, he repeatedly cited predictions that up to 2.2 million Americans could die from the virus if nothing were done to stop its spread. He talked about “the viciousness” of the virus and revealed that it had sent a friend to the hospital.

“He’s a little older and he’s heavy. But he’s a tough person, and we went to the hospital and a day later he’s in a coma,” Mr. Trump said. “How is he doing? ‘Sir, he’s in a coma. He’s unconscious. He’s not doing well.’ The speed and the viciousness, especially if it gets the right person, it is horrible.”

The president also expressed horror at the grim scenes playing out at the hospitals in New York City, where he spent much of his adult life. He cited the situation at Elmhurst Hospital Center — “I know it very well,” he said — which has been inundated in recent days with people ill from the virus.

“I’ve been watching that for the last week on television, body bags all over in hallways,” Mr. Trump said. “I have been watching them bringing in trailer trucks, freezer trucks because they can’t handle the bodies. There are so many of them. This is in essentially my community in Queens, New York. I have seen things that I have never seen before.”

The president’s turnabout came as state and local officials across the country confronted rapidly rising numbers of infections that threatened to overwhelm their hospitals amid shortages of protective equipment and fears that there would not be enough doctors and nurses to tend to those who get sick.

Several of the nation’s governors said on Sunday that they anticipated surges of cases during the next several weeks, and they urged their residents to continue to follow social distancing guidelines that would slow the spread of the pandemic.

“If we don’t flatten the curve, we’re on a trajectory currently to exceed our capacity in the New Orleans area for ventilators by about April the 4th, and all beds available in hospitals by about April the 10th,” Gov. John Bel Edwards, Democrat of Louisiana, said on NBC’s “Meet the Press” program Sunday morning. “So we’re doing everything we can to surge capacity. It’s very difficult.”

Gov. Jay Inslee, Democrat of Washington, who has frequently clashed with Mr. Trump, said before the president’s announcement that his state would not be ready to lift social distancing guidelines any time soon.

“Boy, I would not want to be responsible for opening the door to this virus to ravage our places that seem OK today, but, within 10 weeks, within 10 days, can be at full-scale burning through our hospital system,” Mr. Inslee said on CNN’s “State of the Union” program. “And we have seen this happen. We have got to be ahead of this curve.”

Over the last several days, Mr. Trump has lashed out at the governors, suggesting that some of them do not appreciate the help that they are getting from him and from others in the federal government.

Mr. Edwards and several other governors largely steered clear of responding to those criticisms by Mr. Trump. Instead, several of them stressed that they were working with the Federal Emergency Management Agency and other federal agencies even as they pleaded for more help getting ventilators, surgical masks and other medical equipment they need.

“You know, I don’t have energy to respond to every slight,” Gov. Gretchen Whitmer, Democrat of Michigan, said on “State of the Union.” “What I’m trying to do is work well with the federal government. And I will tell you this. There are people from the White House on down who are working 24/7, just like we are at the states. We’re all stressed, because we have people that are dying right now.”

Still, on Sunday, Mr. Trump repeated a complaint that Democratic governors had insulted him and said he would delegate calls with those officials to other people in the White House.

“I don’t have to call because I’m probably better off not,” Mr. Trump said, describing Mr. Inslee as “a nasty person” and raising his failed candidacy for the Democratic presidential nomination. “I don’t like the governor of Washington, so you know who calls? I get Mike Pence to call. I get the head of FEMA to call. I get the admiral to call.”

“Because when they disrespect me, they’re disrespecting our government,” he said.

And Mr. Trump once again targeted officials in New York for scorn, appearing to suggest that New York hospitals are hoarding — or doing something else improper — with protective gear like their surgical masks. He said that he did not believe they really need the increases in protective equipment they claim are necessary to protect doctors and nurses treating coronavirus patients.

Mr. Trump said he was told that demand for masks at a New York hospital jumped from 10,000 to 20,000 per week before the virus arrived to nearly 300,000 a week now.

“Something’s going on. And you ought to look into it as reporters. Where are the masks going — are they going out the back door?” Mr. Trump said. “Somebody should probably look into that because I just don’t see from a practical standpoint how that’s possible to go from that to that, and we have that happening in numerous places.”

The president seemed to be suggesting that New York hospitals were lying about how many masks they needed. Mr. Trump said he was given the information about the increased demand for masks at the hospital from an executive of a company that makes them who was sitting in the audience.

In fact, hospitals throughout the country have said the surge in coronavirus patients requires that doctors and nurses change masks repeatedly throughout the day to protect themselves from getting infected. That has created a huge shortage of masks.

Mr. Trump again clashed with reporters, chiding Yamiche Alcindor, a PBS reporter, and later Jeremy Diamond, a CNN reporter, who made a point of giving his question to Ms. Alcindor, whom the president cut off earlier in the news conference. He instructed Ms. Alcindor to be nice and not “threatening,” while Mr. Diamond’s question prompted him to declare: “CNN is not trusted anymore. They are fake news.”

Before facing reporters, he attacked the “the Lamestream Media” on Twitter, even as he repeatedly trumpeted the high ratings for his coronavirus briefings, which have rivaled “Monday Night Football” and the season finale of “The Bachelor.”

Mr. Trump also denied on Sunday that he had threatened to quarantine New York, New Jersey and Connecticut on Saturday, despite suggesting 24 hours earlier that he was seriously considering doing just that.

“I didn’t do that at all. Read the statement. Read the statement. Read what I said,” Mr. Trump told a reporter. “I said we’re going to look into possibly quarantine. I didn’t say we’re going to quarantine. I looked at it as a possibility, because a lot of our professionals suggested quarantine. I said we’re going to look at it.”

The president’s musings about a ban on travel in and out of New York and the other states prompted hours of confusion and some fear as residents of the three states considered rushing to leave before the quarantine was put in place. On Saturday evening, Mr. Trump announced a travel advisory urging people against nonessential travel but stopping short of a quarantine.

transcript

From The New York Times, I’m Michael Barbaro. This is “The Daily.”

Today: As the pandemic quickly spreads across the U.S., hundreds of hospitals are now confronting their first serious cases of the coronavirus. Susan Dominus on the lessons from the first confirmed case in New Jersey.

It’s Monday, March 30.

Sue, tell me how you first heard about James Cai.

Well, a few weeks ago I heard about this young guy, a 32-year-old physician assistant, who was the very first patient in all of New Jersey to test positive for Covid-19.

And so I reached out to him while he was still at the hospital. And I was sort of wondering, would it possibly be OK, could you maybe find some time to talk? And he said, sure, call me now. I’m in isolation, in other words, and I have time.

Hello? [COUGHING]

Are you there?

Yes. [COUGHING]

OK.

And what was the story that he told you?

So James lives and works in New York City.

So my name is James Cai, and I’m a physician assistant.

And his mother and grandfather live in New Jersey, and so he spends quite a bit of time there as well.

And I work as a primary care, urgent care and nursing home P.A.

He came to this country when he was about 16 from Shanghai. And he’s married and has a 20-month-old daughter, whom he adores.

Why did you go into medicine in the first place? Why were you drawn to medicine?

Oh, because of my grandparents. They are doctors. My grandfather is an anesthesiologist in Shanghai. And when I was young, I always sick, so I always went to his hospital. So I had a good impression.

And as someone working in the medical field, was James expecting to interact with this epidemic, the coronavirus? Was he maybe even thinking he would end up treating coronavirus patients?

Well, he doesn’t work in a hospital. And because he works in private practice, I think he probably imagined he might be working remotely — with telemedicine.

I actually heard about coronavirus many months ago when China had outbreak. But I always followed the disease.

But because of the family background and because he does work in medicine, when news of the coronavirus did start coming out of Wuhan, he definitely understood how quickly the virus could spread. And he definitely understood that the only way to guarantee that you could survive this was by not getting it in the first place.

Around end of February, I started to pile up all the food, like canned foods, frozen vegetables, dumplings.

So soon after the coronavirus landed on the west coast, he and his family went to Costco and stocked up —

Our family plan is to stay home for two months.

— for like, two months’ worth of supplies.

Right. So they were going to avoid any meaningful exposure to the virus?

Yeah, if there was communal spread and it had become widespread, their plan was to shelter in place.

And well ahead of the rest of us.

Yeah, I think that’s right.

So you weren’t sure at what point you would start doing that, but you felt you’d know when it was time?

Yes.

But, you know, he’s stocking up at the end of February. You know, people in the U.S. were still flying all over the country. Kids were going to school. Bloomberg was in the race for president. People were planning vacations and weddings and all sorts of conferences and events. And the same was true of James. So like everybody else, he’s going about his life. And around this time, without really too much concern about his health, he went to a medical conference in Times Square.

So I changed diaper for my daughter and gave her morning milk. And I kissed my wife and to go to conference.

On the fourth day of the conference, Monday, March 2, he comes down with a cough. And he starts to realize he’s actually getting sick.

I start to cough and a fever and tired.

So he leaves and texts his wife that he’s going to go to New Jersey, where his mom has a house. His mom’s away. And he doesn’t want to come home and get his wife and the baby sick.

Because of my daughter, when I went home, she always hugged me and kissed me. And she will catch it.

And what’s running through his head at this moment? Is he thinking, I have a bad cough? I might have the flu? Is coronavirus even on his mind?

Not really. I mean, there had not been a single case in all of New Jersey. He thought he probably had the flu. By then, he was mostly feeling this bad cough. He had an elevated heart rate. His eyes were really runny. He had diarrhea. He was not feeling well at all. But he also was not alarmed. You know, he decided to go to one of those drop-in centers to get a flu test, because he wanted to be told he didn’t have the flu so he could go home. So the doctor gives him a strep test and a flu test. They discuss whether he should get a coronavirus test, in fact, but the doctor didn’t have one. So they moved on. And the results came back that although the strep and the flu tests were negative, his symptoms were consistent with something called a pulmonary embolism, which is a clot in your lung that can be fatal.

So this could potentially be even more serious than just a seasonal flu or —

Yes. Certainly more serious than the flu.

So after, I went direct to the Hackensack emergency room.

So the doctor sends him to the E.R. at the Hackensack University Medical Center, which is not far from that doctor’s office.

And in the emergency room, they asked me questions. Asked me if I cough. I said, I do, I do have cough. I do have shortness of breath.

So as called for, the doctors do a CT scan. And after they do, they realize that, no, he does not have a pulmonary embolism. But that in fact, because of the symptoms he’s having and the way his lungs look in the scan —

They see a ground glass nodules. So this can be coronavirus.

— he might actually have coronavirus.

And how do the doctors at this hospital react to that?

Well, at this point, they haven’t seen any coronavirus patients. So they don’t seem to him terribly alarmed. That said, they do put him in a tiny isolation room, a windowless room on the floor of the emergency room. That’s where he spends the night, texting his friends and his wife and getting increasingly unnerved and feeling quite ill.

I was nervous. And at the same time, since I’m in the hospital, I’m going to check everything. Make sure I’m OK and then I go home.

So then on Tuesday, March 3, which is the second day in the hospital —

They decide to do a test on me. So the test takes about 24 hours or 48 hours.

— they do a Covid-19 test. And they tell him he’s going to have to wait a few days for the result, but he shouldn’t worry, he’s young and healthy. At the same time, he’s wildly Googling symptoms for Covid-19 and realizing that he has almost every one of them.

I had maybe lied to myself, was like, trying to calm myself down. I don’t have the Covid-19, I shouldn’t have it.

And so, it’s day three for James in the hospital. It’s Wednesday, March 4. He’s still waiting for the results in his tiny little room with a TV. And —

[SOUND OF LOCAL NEWS THEME]

— a local news report comes on.

We we begin tonight with breaking news regarding the coronavirus.

Yeah, that virus arriving in the Garden State tonight. Governor Phil Murphy announcing the first presumptive positive case of the virus right here in New Jersey.

And the news report says —

A man in his thirties is hospitalized in Bergen County.

There’s a guy in his thirties in Bergen County, which is where he is, who’s tested positive for coronavirus. It’s the first case in New Jersey.

Governor Murphy saying —

There’s even a tweet from the governor of New Jersey confirming it.

— “We take this situation very seriously and have been preparing for this for weeks. I urge residents to remain calm” —

And it occurs to James, they really might be talking about him.

And then I asked the doctor, saying, is this me? And the doctor’s saying, no, your test is not back yet.

And of course, he hasn’t heard anything about the results of his test yet?

No, he has not heard anything.

Wow. So you found out from the news from the governor of New Jersey?

Yes. On TV. And I asked the doctor. The doctor say, the result is not back yet.

And then the next day, his doctors come to him and say, yes, you have tested positive. And he is the first person in New Jersey to have tested positive for Covid-19.

Right. And perhaps the first person in the history of the universe to find out he has a disease, not from his doctor, but from TV news.

Let’s hope so.

And how does the hospital react in this moment?

So he’s really scared. But the hospital is telling him that he really has nothing to worry about. He’s a 32-year-old guy. He’s got no preexisting conditions.

Even Dr. [INAUDIBLE] was telling me, oh you’re so young. It’s like a flu.

In fact, one doctor even told him —

If it’s not because everybody is talking about corona, you can go home already.

You know, if it weren’t for all this attention about the coronavirus, you’d be home right now, just getting better in the comfort of your own bedroom.

In other words, it would probably just self-resolve in somebody of his health?

That was definitely the expectation.

I mean, that day, I was so depressed.

I think he felt that as a medical professional, he actually — he knew that he was quite vulnerable, that nobody was invulnerable. And there was this disconnect between his own concerns and their own insistence that he was overly anxious.

America is not ready.

It also dawns on him that he is the first person in this hospital to be treated for coronavirus.

I feel like, I’m in real trouble. Why I come to this hospital? Because I feel they don’t know how to treat this disease, and they don’t have deep understanding about this disease.

Nobody there has any experience. Nobody there can make good predictions. Nobody there has institutional knowledge about what happens when this goes wrong or something unexpected happens. He’s the first person, and that’s a very frightening position to be in.

We’ll be right back.

So Sue, James is newly diagnosed. He’s in isolation at this hospital in Hackensack, New Jersey. He’s been there for about four days. Physically, how is he doing at this point?

When you first got the results of the positive test, on a scale of 1 to 10, how bad did you feel physically? 10 being the worst?

I would say 10.

Wow.

He is feeling worse by the day.

Getting worse. So my heart is compensating, beating very fast.

He definitely has that cough. And he also is having real trouble breathing.

It’s like I’m in the water.

Tell me more about that.

It’s like, normally, we can just take very deep breaths in and out.

He describes it as that feeling when you’re underwater and you have to come up to gasp for breath, but you can’t quite get that oxygen that you want. And it’s very panicking feeling. It’s a very scary feeling.

So my lung is not allowing me to take deep breaths.

And how is the hospital treating him now that he’s officially tested positive?

They move him to a room with certain protections in place. And they’re keeping an eye on his numbers. And they’re giving him oxygen when he needs it. And he’s also keeping an eye on his numbers. And he’s worried, because he is not breathing well. And on Friday, March 6, his fifth day in the hospital, he worries that he is desaturating to a dangerous level.

And I desats.

He desats.

You desaturated.

And what does that mean, to desaturate?

It means that when you desaturate below a certain level, your blood is not getting enough oxygen from your lungs for you to function in a normal, healthy way. And this is really concerning to him.

You have pneumonia, it’s normal. Just use oxygen.

But he still has the sense that the hospital is telling him he’s overreacting, that he’s being too anxious. He’s going to recover just fine.

I was confused. And also, I was worried, because I think I’m not getting enough care. And my oxygen level dropped, and they — they cannot even see it.

And why do you think people in hospital are saying that? And maybe more importantly, why are they thinking that? Why are they insisting on being so calm about what it would mean to have an infection like this?

I would have to guess that it’s because the widespread impression that people had was that young people were not going to be terribly affected by this virus, and that it was going to feel like a very, very bad flu. And that he was going to recover just fine, just like the statistics supposedly said he was going to.

And did you actually feel yourself having difficulty breathing at that point?

I just feel tightness.

Tightness in your chest?

I feel like, a very scary — very scared. And I don’t know what to do next.

And James is all too aware that no one in that hospital has ever treated anyone with coronavirus. And he’s really worried about his symptoms, because he knows he’s feeling worse and worse every day.

So I told my cousin, I told everybody, and they just start searching. .

So he starts reaching out to friends of his who are plugged into the Chinese medical community, including his best friend, who’s a physician — and whom he calls his cousin — and his boss. And they start making phone calls and trying to get information from experienced people who can maybe share what they’ve learned.

Which is what?

You know, there’s advice that he should get high doses of vitamin C, there’s some discussion of whether he should get a steroid treatment if things get worse.

He translate the seventh edition.

They say that maybe he wants to look into antiviral medication. They tell him he shouldn’t wait too long before getting a second CT scan. But his doctors were really reluctant to do that.

Why was that?

They felt like they were giving him good care and that probably the results of the CT scan would not change that.

So James is more or less beginning to advise his own doctors on how to treat him, based on his research, based on his relationship with other medical professionals, which is pretty unusual.

Yes. Very unusual. And then the evening of the 7th, he starts desaturating to a level that really scares him. He’s concerned that if he desaturates to a certain degree, there could be no turning back. He’d have to be intubated, which definitely increases, you know, all of the risks of the illness. It would mean that a machine was going be doing all the breathing for him. It could lead to organ failure and in some cases, of course, death.

And I mean, if I intubated at night, I probably would just die by myself alone, without seeing the loved ones.

And his friends — also, some of them see this real urgency to save his life. And you know, one of his friends said to me that he personally felt responsible for making sure that the doctors took James’s case as seriously as possible. Here he is. He’s the first health care worker in New Jersey also to come down with Covid-19. If he didn’t make it, it was going to feel like the battle was over before it had even begun.

You always live in fear that you’re never going to wake up. And also, in isolation. And nobody can see you. So it’s very miserable. If people die, think about it, people die and they cannot see their loved ones. What — I mean, like, I feel like it’s very tough, right? For somebody to die alone.

You were scared. I mean, you were probably too weak to really speak forcefully, but you were letting them know that you felt that your life was on the line at this point.

Yeah.

And we don’t exactly know why, but on the 8th, he did get that second CT scan.

And it come back very bad.

It’s bad. He has pneumonia in both lungs. 30 to 40 percent of his lungs seem to be affected. That’s astonishing, that it would go from a small spot just a few days earlier to where it is now. And if he had gotten that bad in three days or four days since the last CT scan, how much worse was he going to be in another four days? And now, James starts to worry that he really might not survive this.

I was praying to everybody, to God, to Buddha, to everybody, saying, don’t let me die.

When I know my oxygen levels keep desaturating, one of my requests is can I see my mother and my wife or my daughter for the last time? It was that time, when my chest X-rays show so bad, and my oxygen level every day is dropping, and I would tell them that I have to be strong, but I don’t know how many days I can live.

And the good thing is, after the CT, they listened. When she saw second CT, she was like, OK, we have to treat you.

I spoke to a doctor at the hospital who was part of the team overseeing his care. And he said they’d been looking at the whole clinical picture, had recognized that he was declining even before the CT scan. But from James’s point of view, everything changed after the scan. He feels like, now they’re taking this very seriously and they’re listening to him. They’re coming around to seeing just how serious it is. And also recognizing that, yes, even a young person can get very, very sick with coronavirus. And they’re willing to try something.

And at this stage, what is he asking them to do?

So then a doctor in China recommend a high-flow machine.

James wants a few different types of treatment. He’s been advised that the doctors should try providing him a more intensive form of oxygen therapy. And he wants to go on three experimental antiviral medications — Kaletra, chloroquine and remdesivir. And at this point, he and the doctors at Hackensack and all the other doctors he’s working with are pretty much all on the same page. He finally gets the main things he’s been asking for.

And I think the next day, Dr. [INAUDIBLE] came in. He said, the medication’s here. We’re going to give it to you.

And finally, after more than a week in the hospital, James starts to turn around. He does start to feel better.

So after the first day, my fever finally dropped. And my oxygen stopped dropping.

I’m getting better and better every day. So that’s the whole thing.

And does he have a sense, do you have a sense, do his doctors have a sense of which of these treatments was responsible for that?

Not really. I mean, it might have been any one of the drugs, or all of the drugs, or the oxygen, or some combination of that. Or he might have just gotten better on his own. We really don’t know.

And so I asked you how you felt on a scale of 1 to 10, 10 being the worst, when you first got the results of the test, and you said that you were a 10. On a scale of 1 to 10, how do you feel now?

I would say now, maybe 3.

That’s pretty good.

Yeah, because I feel like all the symptoms have gone. I mean, I will be maybe no worry if tests come back negative. Then I know the virus is dead. Now, I don’t know if it is dead or not.

It’s now 10:37, and I need you to get a good night’s sleep. So I’m going to call you in the morning and see how your oxygen level were. Is that OK?

Yes. OK. Thank you.

All right. Thanks, James. Bye. Bye.

Good night. Bye-bye.

Sue, it feels — correct me if I’m wrong — like a big reason why James survived was because he was such an aggressive advocate for himself. And he had this network of expertise that he could tap into. He himself was a medical professional. And that that put him in a very strong position. But I wonder why the people around him in this hospital were not better prepared, given the stage of this pandemic when he arrived in Hackensack.

We don’t really know what saved his life, because these drugs are still in clinical trials. What we do know is that the entire story of coronavirus in this country is a story of lack of preparation. People did not believe that it simply was never going to be as bad here as it was in Wuhan or Milan. That is a universal story. It was hardly just these doctors at this hospital. I mean, part of it is that they are busy people. They are moving things really quickly. They are saving lives every day. In fact, we all know that they’re saving lives and putting their own lives on the line right now. But also, it is just hard to put yourself back in that moment — March 1, March 2 or the end of February — and remember how unlikely we all still hoped and believed, against all evidence, that this wasn’t going to be devastating here the way it was elsewhere.

Right.

That said, to their credit, the doctors at this hospital were open-minded and they were flexible and they were nimble. And they were willing to try whatever they could that was safe when they realized that whatever they had been doing definitely was not working. And I know James feels really appreciative, ultimately. He sent out a tweet that expressed his gratitude for the hospital saving, as he sees it, his life.

Sue, what do you think the lesson of this story is, of James, his very unique situation in these early days of the pandemic in the United States, and of what happened to him at this hospital?

One of the things that I’m hearing from doctors is that until you are in this moment and experiencing the onslaught of patients, it is very hard to imagine it. You can’t really know until you’re actually living it. And you know, every hospital in this country is likely to have its James. It’s going to have that first patient who comes in, who is really ill. They’re not exactly sure how to treat it. We still really don’t know how best to treat this virus. That is the hard, cold truth of it. There are some protocols that we hope will help, that are thought might help. But it’s unclear. It’s so new. And it’s going to be really hard for all those hospitals. And they’re going to have to make difficult choices. They’re going to have to make complicated ethical choices. They’re going to have to make decisions on the fly and build up their clinical experience. And it’s not going to be easy for any of them.

Sue, how is James doing at this point? I don’t know when the last time it was that you spoke with him, but what did he tell you?

He’s home. He is still in quarantine. So he still has not been able to see his wife or daughter. And his lungs are still recovering. It’s unclear just how fully they will recover. You know, it’s definitely a long road ahead of him. And at the same time, you know, he’s reading the news and he is feeling so lucky.

Lucky to be alive?

To be alive.

Thank you, Sue.

Thank you, Michael.

Hello?

Hi, James, it’s Sue. How are you doing?

I’m good.

Are you actually in your own home?

Yes.

How does it feel?

It feels great. I’m going to sleep on my own bed.

Fantastic.

Once I’m out of the hospital, I feel like I’m alive.

I feel like everything is so new to me. The grass, trees, cars, new people face, the sky. And then when I drive on the road, I appreciate every building, every people I see.

I feel like it’s a second chance to live again, to be alive.

What is the first thing you’re going to say to your daughter and wife when you finally get to see them in person? I know you’re quarantining for almost two more weeks now.

Yes. So when I see my daughter and my wife, I definitely will give them big hugs. Try to don’t let them go. I maybe will, like, have my daughter in my arms all the time. I will come home and spend every minute with my family. Appreciate every day, living.

All right. Good night. Have a great night’s sleep. Thanks, James.

Thank you. Thank you for checking in on me.

My pleasure. Bye. Goodbye.

Bye-bye.



We’ll be right back.

Here’s what else you need to know today. In interviews on Sunday, members of the president’s coronavirus task force delivered dire warnings about the pandemic’s projected path in the United States.

No state, no metro area will be spared. And the sooner we react, and the sooner the states and the metro areas react and ensure that they put in full mitigation, at the same time understanding exactly what their hospitals need, then we’ll be able to move forward together and protect the most Americans.

Speaking to NBC News, Dr. Deborah Birx said that the White House was asking every state to prepare for the kind of outbreak now occurring in New York, where there are about 60,000 infections.

Well, Dr. Birx said yesterday, as you know, that she doesn’t think any city will be spared from this virus. How many cases do you think the U.S. will reach?

I mean, looking at what we’re seeing now, you know, I would say between 100 and 200,000 cases — excuse me, deaths. But I just don’t think that we really need to make a projection when it’s such a moving target.

On CNN, Dr. Anthony Fauci said that millions of Americans could eventually be infected, and that between 100,000 and 200,000 could die.

What we do know, Jake, is that we’ve got a serious problem in New York. We have a serious problem in New Orleans. And we’re going to be developing serious problems in other areas.

On Sunday night, the president extended federal guidelines for social distancing to the end of April and backed away from his previous plan to open up much of the country by Easter.

That’s it for “The Daily.” I’m Michael Barbaro. See you tomorrow.

Emily Cochrane contributed reporting from Washington, and Maggie Haberman from New York.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — China and Russia have both seized on the novel coronavirus to wage disinformation campaigns that seek to sow doubts about the United States’ handling of the crisis and deflect attention from their own struggles with the pandemic, according to American intelligence officials and diplomats.

Kremlin-aligned websites aimed at Western audiences have trafficked in conspiracy theories to spread fear in Europe and political division in the United States, the officials said, noting that Russia’s diplomats and state-run news media have arguably been more restrained.

China has been more overtly aggressive. It has used a network of government-linked social media accounts to spread discredited, and sometimes contradictory, theories. And China has adopted Russia’s playbook for more covert operations, mimicking Kremlin disinformation campaigns and even using and amplifying some of the same conspiracy sites.

The propaganda campaigns show how both countries turned to a typical authoritarian tactic of spreading propaganda to undermine their shared adversary, the United States, rather than addressing public criticism of their own problems.

In the days to come, China is likely to back off the public spread of disinformation through its Foreign Ministry and network of embassies and to further embrace the more subtle Russian-style approach, relying on its intelligence services to spread misinformation about the origins of the virus and China’s handling of it, senior American intelligence officials assessed.

Washington and Beijing have reached a tentative détente, other American officials said, that calls for both sides to halt public attacks on each other about the virus, but officials are skeptical that the uneasy truce will hold.

One senior American official said China had signaled to the United States that it would throttle its disinformation in the face of criticism from European countries and the U.S. State Department. Other officials said China was merely shifting tactics, finding its disinformation campaign was less effective than it had hoped. And President Trump has moved toward conciliation, holding a telephone call with President Xi Jinping of China on Thursday night in which the two leaders “agreed to work together to defeat the coronavirus pandemic,” according to a White House summary of the conversation.

Russia and China as well as Iran have sharply increased their dissemination of disinformation about the coronavirus since January, even repeating and amplifying one another’s propaganda and falsehoods, including anti-American conspiracy theories, said Lea Gabrielle, a special envoy and coordinator of the Global Engagement Center at the State Department.

“The Covid-19 crisis has really provided an opportunity for malign actors to exploit the information space for harmful purposes,” Ms. Gabrielle told reporters on Friday, referring to the disease caused by the virus. Teams at the department are working on countering the messages, she said.

Speaking at the White House on March 20, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo denounced China, Russia and Iran for “coordinated efforts” at spreading disinformation.

China has a long history of propaganda and efforts to cajole the world into following its own narrative on geopolitical issues like Taiwan, Tibet or Hong Kong. While it pushes its policies and views, some openly anti-American, it rarely puts enormous resources behind fringe conspiracy theories.

But that has changed during the pandemic, intelligence officials and outside experts said. In a highly coordinated campaign, Chinese officials and institutions have spread talking points centered on two narratives: that the United States is to blame for the origins of the virus and that the Communist Party has successfully contained the virus after a hard-fought campaign, affirming the superiority of its system.

As part of the information war, China is also expelling journalists from three major American newspapers, including The New York Times.

After remaining relatively quiet early in the year, Chinese Foreign Ministry officials have in recent weeks amplified conspiratorial stories as the coronavirus outbreak has spread globally while China has claimed to have wrested it under control in the city of Wuhan where it originated.

Chinese officials appeared to have relied on borrowing falsehoods pushed by anti-American organizations cultivated by the Kremlin that already have an audience in Western countries. Some of the sites have received Russian money, according to experts.

On March 12, for instance, Zhao Lijian, a Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman, posted a link on Twitter to what he described as a “very much important” article that falsely described American origins of the coronavirus.

The article was from Global Research, a group based in Montreal that presents itself as a think tank but largely traffics in conspiracy theories, many of them pro-Russian and anti-American.

At least a dozen other Chinese Embassies around the world retweeted Mr. Zhao’s post. All told, more than 12,000 accounts have retweeted it and more than 20,000 users have liked it.

Other outlets that routinely push out disinformation subsequently picked up the theory and added their own twists. One of the main contributors to the far-right financial site ZeroHedge, who goes by the pseudonym “Tyler Durden” — the name of Brad Pitt’s character in the 1999 movie “Fight Club” — referred to Mr. Zhao’s tweet in a lengthy post on a lesser-known site and presented the new coronavirus as the “black swan that the globalists were waiting for (or planning) all along.”

Another site, Veterans Today, which traffics in conspiracy theories, many of them anti-American, claimed to “break” the untrue story of how an American sports team had brought the coronavirus to Wuhan in October. “No video or photos exist of the U.S. team, no records were kept,” the outlet asserted, adding that many athletes from the purported team did not even compete and instead hung around the open-air market where the virus is believed to have first emerged in humans.

The tactics are “a significant departure from how the Chinese have operated in the past,” said Laura Rosenberger, the director of the Alliance for Securing Democracy, a project of the nonpartisan German Marshall Fund of the United States.

“Russia has long spread multiple, seemingly contradictory disinformation narratives and then said, ‘How can we know for sure what happened, how can we know the truth?’” she added. “We have never really seen China do that externally before. But now we see Chinese officials and media trying out those typically Russian tactics.”

On Monday, the Alliance for Securing Democracy will unveil a tool to track the Chinese disinformation and give a sense of the narrative Beijing is pushing. The group’s Hamilton dashboard has long monitored Russian Twitter accounts and broadcast feeds.

In recent days, Chinese officials have refined their messaging to move away from outright lies or falsehoods, Ms. Gabrielle said.

“I will say that the information space is ever-evolving,” she said. “It’s been very fluid, and China’s approach to it has been as well.”

In Africa, for example, Beijing’s diplomatic accounts tried for a couple of days to amplify the conspiracy theories pushed by Mr. Zhao. But since March 15, the propaganda in Africa has mainly praised Chinese efforts. Ms. Gabrielle said her teams had seen similar shifting patterns in China’s messaging in Italy and elsewhere in the West.

China’s own initial failures in fighting the virus prevented its government from mounting a propaganda campaign of simply promoting its own achievements, forcing it to embrace Russian-style disinformation, said Matthew Kroenig, a former C.I.A. official and the author of a new book on the growing competition between China and the United States, “The Return of Great Power Rivalry.”

“Part of the reason the Chinese are copying the Russian playbook is because they mismanaged the crisis,” Mr. Kroenig said. “But they are also learning from the Russians.”

Russia’s public messaging about the coronavirus has been reserved, prompting some American officials and experts to conclude that Moscow, uncertain of how the pandemic will play out, had decided to hedge its public message by avoiding conspiracy theories that could blow back on the Russian government.

Still, Russia has shifted its propaganda efforts in Europe and elsewhere to focus on the virus, spreading conspiracy theories about it, according to the European Union’s disinformation unit, which has tracked it.

The North Atlantic Treaty Organization has been a target of the Russian effort. The Lithuanian government believes Moscow was behind a falsified account that an American soldier serving in the NATO force in Lithuania had tested positive for coronavirus, a Lithuanian official said. Since then, Russia has spread other disinformation in Lithuania and in other countries in the Atlantic alliance.

The Russians’ tactics have a canny circularity, Ms. Gabrielle said. They push out a false message, which the Chinese and Iranians pick up and promote, and then Russian actors will repost the Chinese or Iranian versions of the message to make it seem like new information that had originated independently elsewhere.

<|endoftext|>

Police officers were watching Rhode Island’s highways, bridges and bus stops. National Guard troops were trudging through resort towns with clipboards, knocking on doors. They were all hunting for fleeing New Yorkers and their telltale Empire State license plates.

The states are increasingly finding themselves pitted against one another, as they bid for scarce medical equipment, angle for federal aid and demand that nonresidents self-quarantine.

Few, though, have gone yet to the lengths Rhode Island has to try to keep the potentially infected at bay, especially those from New York, the biggest hot spot in the country.

Gov. Gina Raimondo, a Democrat, said on Friday that if New Yorkers entering the state did not quarantine themselves for 14 days after arrival, they would be fined and, if they continued to flout the order, arrested.

“That’s a law — that’s an order,” Ms. Raimondo said. “It comes with penalties. It’s not a suggestion.”

She sent troops and police officers to the main highways entering the state, as well as to Amtrak stations and the main airport, to stop and warn people coming from New York State about the quarantine order. And on Saturday, she extended the order to cover travelers from any state.

She was not alone in establishing checkpoints to stop travelers from places where the virus is widespread. Gov. Ron DeSantis of Florida, a Republican, said on Saturday that his administration would try to set up a checkpoint on Interstate 95 near the Georgia border to stop drivers from the New York area and tell them they had to quarantine themselves for two weeks.

“It’s not fair to the people of Florida” that outsiders keep coming in, Governor DeSantis said. “It would make it a lot easier if we didn’t have folks coming in from hot zones where they may be very well carrying the virus.”

On Friday, Mr. DeSantis extended his quarantine order to cover travelers from Louisiana as well, and authorized highway checkpoints in the Panhandle to intercept and warn them.

President Trump said on Saturday that concerns raised by states like Rhode Island and Florida about travelers from New York City had prompted him to consider imposing a federal quarantine of New York, New Jersey and part of Connecticut. He later backed off the idea.

Legal experts said that states were on shaky ground pulling people over just for their license plates. And Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said on Saturday that Rhode Island’s action was “at the point of absurdity.”

“If they don’t roll back that policy, I’m going to sue Rhode Island, because that clearly is unconstitutional,” Governor Cuomo said on CNN, though he added that he didn’t think it would come to that. “We’ll work it out amicably, I’m sure,” he said.

Even so, Rhode Island’s measures were welcomed by many “year-rounders” who live in the state’s summer resort communities near the Connecticut border. They have been growing increasingly frustrated with an influx of New Yorkers fleeing the city to second homes and rental properties in the area, and possibly bringing the virus with them.

Local residents have been posting videos and photographs in local Facebook groups of cars with New York tags being pulled over.

John Austin witnessed a stop on Friday in Westerly, a town of about 23,000 in the corner of the state nearest to New York, when a trooper’s flashing lights followed a driver into the parking lot of Sandy’s Fine Food Emporium, where Mr. Austin is the store manager.

“It is live, and it is happening,” Mr. Austin said. “It’s happening in our backyard.”

He said that police officers were stationed all along Route 78 from the state line at the Pawcatuck River to his store. “It’s not easy for any one of us,” he said. “Let’s pray for a resolution quick.”

When the police officers stop New Yorkers or find them in their summer homes, they hand out copies of the governor’s executive order and collect contact information. Any who manage to avoid the officers may face another penalty: public shaming.

“Leaving Walmart filled to the top,” one woman seethed in a posting to a local Facebook group, alongside photos of a Volkswagen with New York plates and a trunk loaded with paper towels. Another woman responded, “They need to go home!”

Nearly half of the country’s more than 119,000 coronavirus cases have been confirmed in New York State, in part because of widespread testing there. Rhode Island, the smallest state by area, had 239 cases on Saturday evening, and had reported its first two deaths.

Texas, Maryland and South Carolina are among other states that have ordered people arriving from New York to self-quarantine. In Texas, for instance, the Department of Public Safety said Friday that its agents would make surprise visits to see whether travelers were adhering to the state’s mandate, and they warned that violators could be fined $1,000 and jailed for up to 180 days.

The orders have not come without controversy: Steven Brown, the executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union of Rhode Island, said outright that the police stops in that state were unconstitutional.

“Under the Fourth Amendment, having a New York state license plate simply does not, and cannot, constitute ‘probable cause’ to allow police to stop a car and interrogate the driver, no matter how laudable the goal of the stop may be,” Mr. Brown said in a statement.

Lawrence O. Gostin, the chair of global health law at Georgetown University, agreed that the directive appeared “too arbitrary and capricious” to be upheld by a judge. License plates were far from foolproof indicators of whether someone had been exposed to the virus, he noted.

The legal principle barring states from treating residents of other states differently from its own citizens is one of the oldest in the country, rooted in the Privileges and Immunities Clause of the Constitution. That clause forbids discrimination based on state residence in most cases, underpinning the right of unfettered interstate travel.

Neil MacFarquhar, Patricia Mazzei and Alan Blinder contributed reporting.

<|endoftext|>

From the White House to the county courthouse, the coronavirus pandemic has drastically upended the 2020 elections.

Many Democratic leaders now doubt their national party convention will take place as planned in July, while President Trump’s determination to hold the Republican convention could collide with life-and-death realities.

Both Mr. Trump and former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. are wary of holding public events too soon and may not engage in full-fledged campaigning until the summer. 

And hundreds of congressional, statewide and local candidates, who are always overshadowed in presidential years, are turning to the role of good Samaritan — aiding with groceries and hiring people newly out of work in an effort to stay visible without being insensitive to the crisis.

The virus has fundamentally transformed political life in America, affecting how candidates communicate with voters, raise money from donors and confront their opponents. This is for now the country’s first virtual campaign, as the risk of disease physically separates candidates from the people they seek to represent, and pushes officeseekers from Mr. Biden on down to appeal to homebound voters and contributors through balky web videos.

Even when more traditional electioneering resumes, the nature of this race will be profoundly different.

The outbreak, which has already claimed more than 2,000 lives in the United States and well over three million jobs, has thrust the public health threat and economic downturn to the forefront in races up and down the ballot this year.

Incumbents at every level, starting with Mr. Trump, will be judged on how they prepared for and steered the country through a crisis that has turned the life of nearly every voter upside down. 

“This is the question that is going to dominate the election: How did you perform in the great crisis?” said Representative Tom Cole, Republican of Oklahoma, who has canceled fund-raisers and instead scheduled tele-town hall events with guests like the provost at the University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center.

The duration of the election season itself is likely to shrink significantly. The presidential campaign, which typically dominates news coverage for much of the year, could look more like one of Britain’s six-week general election sprints. Should the two major American candidates return to the stump before the fall, they will most likely be crowded out by the grim accounting of the country’s worst pandemic in over a century.

Regional disparities in how the virus is spreading could mean that officeseekers may be able to campaign in parts of the country that are less hard-hit. And if the social distancing measures in place mitigate the outbreak, the contenders could return to the parade and banquet circuit sooner than some anticipate.

But until the spread of the virus slows, there is likely to be little interest in the presidential race and even less in state and local races.

Representative Sean Casten, Democrat of Illinois, has culled his campaign’s phone bank list to voters 60 or older. Rather than ask them policy questions or trumpet his accomplishments, Mr. Casten’s volunteers ask if they need any “health and safety information” and provide a list of senior-only hours at local supermarkets.

“Nobody wants to talk about my thoughts on carbon pricing,” said Mr. Casten, who was a renewable energy executive before he was elected to Congress in 2018.

At the moment, there effectively is no campaign of any consequence to voters who are consumed with their family’s safety and well-being.

“Every issue in my district is impacted by this,” said Representative Elise Stefanik, a Republican who represents much of New York’s vast North Country. “This is going to be an economic issue, it’s going to be a higher ed issue, it’s going to be a border issue.”

The long sweep of American history is filled with presidential elections that took place during times of war and upheaval, but there is little modern precedent for a campaign unfolding against a backdrop of such widespread national fear.

The closest comparison may be the New York mayoral race in 2001, when the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks loomed over the city’s general election. In presidential politics, the Vietnam War, assassinations and civil rights struggles shaped the 1968 campaign and seemed to reveal a country coming apart.

But some historians believe the closest comparison to this year, the last time the entire nation was consumed by a single issue, may be 1944, when the threat of Nazi Germany and imperial Japan fully mobilized American citizens behind the war effort.

“That was the last time there was this sort of disruption in our daily lives and change in rituals,” said Doris Kearns Goodwin, the presidential scholar, noting that millions were deployed in arms and those who remained home lived with rationed goods. “But at least people then could go to work, be part of the effort to win the war.”

Sensing opportunity, Mr. Trump has sought to portray himself as a wartime leader in daily televised news briefings. It has given him a bump in the polls, with his approval ratings creeping up toward 50 percent as independents and some Democrats rally behind him, while Mr. Biden, the likely Democratic nominee, is largely drowned out by the president and even Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York.

“It’s a defining moment,” said Henry Barbour, a Republican National Committee member from Mississippi, adding of Mr. Trump: “The more he reassures Americans, gives them the facts and delivers results, the harder it will be for Joe Biden.”

A race that turns entirely on the response to the current health and economic crises could also render other traditional campaign markers less important — if they happen at all.

While Mr. Trump is loudly insisting his convention will go on in Charlotte, N.C., in late August, it remains to be seen whether the Democratic governor, Roy Cooper, would allow such a large gathering in his state’s most populous city.

Democratic officials are even more skeptical about their convention.

Hundreds of local and state conventions have already been canceled or become mail-in, telephone or online events. There’s talk among some Democrats of conducting the national convention online or through the mail, with some operatives and fund-raisers discussing a one-night television event that could replicate a star-studded awards show.

“The D.N.C. is going to have to start considering that this convention will have to be held in other ways,” said Ken Martin, the Democratic chairman in Minnesota who is also the president of an organization of state Democratic leaders.

For now, Democrats are using a barrage of ads to try to remind voters of Mr. Trump’s initial dismissal of the virus’s severity, but it’s been difficult to broadly divert attention from the threat of the moment.

Some in the party, however, believe the president will ultimately be held to account for his slow response, the unfolding damage to the economy and will suffer from the new light the crisis will cast on domestic issues in the fall.

“The administration’s court case to repeal the A.C.A. takes on a very different meaning,” said Guy Cecil, who runs a Democratic super PAC, referring to the legal effort to strike down Obamacare in its entirety.

But the larger question for Mr. Trump may be whether he can sustain the appearance of a wartime leader able to summon Americans to sacrifice.

The president has already displayed impatience and pique that could damage his re-election chances, lashing out at governors, refusing to take any responsibility for the coronavirus crisis and suggesting Americans can return to life as usual in a way that experts say could exacerbate the spread of the virus.

His campaign is already discussing the possibility of a rally-style event in one of the less-affected states in late April, although one adviser said those discussions are preliminary.

While they would have preferred to use the months before Mr. Biden formally claims the nomination to define the former vice president to their advantage, Republicans generally believe this crisis has done little to diminish Mr. Trump’s prospects.

His campaign continues to raise money online at a brisk pace, but Republican officials privately conceded it has been harder to raise money without events featuring the president.

Fund-raising has been even more difficult for other candidates on the ballot, who often rely more on big-dollar, in-person events rather than internet solicitations. 

Corry Bliss, a Republican strategist, said he expects fund-raising totals for federal candidates from the first three months of the year to be down about 20 percent from what they would have been without the pandemic.

In Missouri, Nicole Galloway, the state auditor and a Democrat, is running for governor. On Thursday night she held a “virtual cocktail hour” by teleconference with a few dozen invited supporters.

With framed photos of her three children over her shoulders, Ms. Galloway told about 60 supporters that Missouri’s Republican governor has been following her lead in responding to the pandemic, answered questions about education funding and professed sadness that she couldn’t travel the state in person.

In the small frames atop the screen, supporters could be seen pouring and mixing drinks. One Missouri donor had distributed a recipe for a drink called “The Democrat,” inspired by the native son Harry Truman’s fondness for bourbon.

Ms. Galloway is hardly the only candidate being creative.

In Georgia, Lynne Homrich, a Republican running for the House, announced her campaign would hire 20 people who had been laid off from local businesses, augmenting a paid campaign staff of five ahead of her May 19 primary.

Ms. Homrich, a former Home Depot executive, began sorting through dozens of emails from people seeking campaign staff work — which in the age of virus means calling or writing people from one’s own home.

Hiral Tipirneni, a former emergency room doctor running for Congress in Arizona, said she spends just as much time explaining the details of the pandemic — in phone calls, video chats and during Facebook Live sessions — as she does asking people to vote for her in November.

“They have medical questions,” Ms. Tipirneni said. “It’s a scary time and whatever I can do to alleviate some of those fears, it’s a moral responsibility.”

<|endoftext|>

I’m 77 years old and I want/need to walk. The two buildings in my complex have a basketball court between them. I have previously taken the freight elevator down 36 stories at 5:30 a.m., meeting no one but armed anyway with mask, gloves, wipes and hand sanitizer. I walked for 35 minutes and went back upstairs, again meeting nobody. Should I force myself to continue? I am simply afraid to go outside.

BARRIE MOTOLA

New York City

Ms. Motola’s world has mostly shrunk to one room. She lives by herself in a studio apartment high above Manhattan, with a piano, books and a narrowing set of routines. Her longtime habit of swimming laps is on pause. So are her dates with her children and grandchildren.

“The walking was truly helping me keep it together,” she said on the telephone. But she stopped a week ago and hasn’t left her building since. “As this ramped up, I kept weighing anything and everything I was thinking about doing outside, and saying: ‘Is it worth getting sick for? Is it worth dying for?’”

She’s not the only one asking. The outdoors is now contested ground. Parks and trails from Los Angeles to the Great Smokies are being closed. (Too many people were socially distancing in the same places, and therefore not at all.) Authorities are patrolling others, warning people to disperse. This week, India’s prime minister told 1.3 billion people not to set foot outside their homes. “Stay Home Save Lives” has become a rallying cry and a pressure point on social media.

“If you’re still not sure about an activity, skip it,” said Kate Brown, the governor of Oregon, one of 22 states and counting where residents have been told to keep to their residences.

While some continue to congregate, many others are now worried about venturing outside at all. “Can we sit on an open lawn with a family member?” a reader from India wrote to ask.

The unpleasant truth, especially for city dwellers, is that every time you step outdoors, your risk of infection rises. Last week, scientists established that coronavirus droplets could linger in the air for a half-hour, raising new concerns about what is safe. Then there’s every surface you encounter on your way outside and back: doorknobs, keys, elevator buttons, gates, the carton of eggs you pick up at the deli that’s still open.

“The safest way to prevent the spread of this virus is for you to stay at home,” said Dr. Craig Spencer, a global emergency medicine specialist at Columbia. “This virus won’t infect you if it never meets you.”

But when we posed Ms. Motola’s dilemma to Dr. Spencer and other public health experts, along with scientists who study the virus’s behavior in air, each one recommended that she resume her dawn walks.

“We’re all struggling with a greater degree of ambient risk than we’re used to,” said Dr. Tim Lahey, an infectious disease specialist and ethicist at the University of Vermont. Each day is an exercise in trying to lower risk: avoid this, scrub that.

Public health practice is as much about reducing risk, as eliminating it — which is often impossible. The AIDS crisis was not stemmed by persuading people to quit sex, Dr. Lahey said. Instead, people adopted tolerable rules like choosing partners carefully and wearing condoms. The term “safer sex” worked because it seemed doable, he added.

The safer-sex equivalent of an outdoor walk, most medical authorities say, is one that involves six feet of distance from others. (Linsey Marr, an engineering professor at Virginia Tech who studies how particles move through air, says she gives it 10 feet just to be cautious.) Governments are beginning to put in place rules to encourage people to spread out. This week, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo announced a pilot program in New York to close some streets to traffic in order to give pedestrians more space. As of Tuesday, the French must follow new restrictions on outdoor exercise: It can be done alone, for up to an hour a day, within a one-kilometer radius of home. Walkers and runners must carry permission slips that can be checked by authorities.

If the distancing rules are too strict, prohibiting excursions entirely, people could give up, said Dr. Carlos Del Rio, a public health and AIDS specialist at Emory University. “I want to be sure that people don’t get frustrated and say, ‘We won’t be able to defeat this,’ because we can,” he said.

“Our mental health is going to be so important,” added Dr. Spencer, who was treated for Ebola in 2014 and endured 19 days of near-total isolation. “This is only going to get worse.”

“Telling people to stay inside works right now, but in two or three weeks, it’s going to be a tough message to hold up,” he said.

Walks and runs are signs of life to which even doctors and scientists on the front lines are clinging. Amandine Gamble, a postdoctoral fellow at the University of California, Los Angeles, is a co-author of that study that raised alarm last week about how the virus lingers in the air. She walks near her home in Santa Monica every day. She finds complete adherence to the six-foot rule challenging, she said, and if someone crosses her path, she does not panic.

Dr. Spencer spends his days treating Covid-19 patients at Columbia. When he comes home, he laces up his sneakers and goes jogging, sometimes late at night.

“It’s one of the only ways I can decompress and disconnect completely from coronavirus,” he said.

We called Ms. Motola to share what the experts had advised. She wasn’t convinced.

“I do have to sit and calculate the risk,” she said. “As soon as I contemplate putting on my sneakers, my anxiety goes right up.”

“One of these mornings I will be brave enough,” she said. “I have to be brave.”

Lauren Messman contributed research.

Dilemmas is a new column about dealing with the human quandaries presented by the coronavirus pandemic. Please send yours to dilemmas@nytimes.com.

<|endoftext|>

Hello, from the socially distanced land of our comfy (read: tiny) New York apartments!

Electoral politics as we know them are on pause at the moment, and the coronavirus has upended the Democratic primary race in many ways. Here’s a look at exactly how, and notes on other things you might have missed in the 2020 race this week.

As President Trump has appeared before the nation for daily briefings and labeled himself a “wartime president,” former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. — the candidate who seems all but certain to face Mr. Trump in the general election — has faced questions online and even at virtual fund-raisers about why he has kept a relatively low profile.

The outbreak has, of course, forced Mr. Biden and Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont off the physical campaign trail. And the unusual situation has left Mr. Biden trying to figure out how to position himself as a prominent voice on the crisis.

“I want to be in daily or at least, you know, significant contact with the American people and communicate what I would be doing, what I think we should be doing and how we should be doing it,” Mr. Biden said on Sunday.

If you’ve watched any of the Democratic debates or attended any campaign events, you know that health care has long been a central issue in the 2020 presidential race. Adding the coronavirus pandemic to the equation has made the stakes even higher and made the difference between Democratic and Republican visions of what the system should look like even more stark.

Advancing “Medicare for all” has, for two cycles now, been Mr. Sanders’s central policy priority, and our colleague Sydney Ember reports that he “believes he can meld this moment of national crisis with the progressive policy agenda that has been his life’s work.”

Our colleague Reid J. Epstein reports that planners for the Democratic National Convention are looking at “contingency options” in case the mid-July gathering in Milwaukee can’t take place.

Our colleague Dionne Searcey looked back at how Americans managed to vote in 1918 when the nation was ravaged by the Spanish flu.

And our colleagues Katie Glueck and Sabrina Tavernise stopped to consider the fact that the most powerful people in American politics are seniors.

Mr. Sanders would like to debate Mr. Biden again if, in fact, a debate is held in April as originally planned.

“Senator Sanders is still running for president,” Mike Casca, one of his top campaign officials, said on Tuesday. “If there is a debate in April, he plans to be there.”

Mr. Biden, not so much.

“I haven’t thought about any more debates,” he said a day later. “I think we’ve had enough debates. I think we should get on with this.”

The Democratic National Committee said previously that there would be a debate in April, but one has not been scheduled and the committee has not announced a media partner or a site host.

Thanks to multiple postponements connected to public health concerns, as many as 10 states and the District of Columbia may now hold primaries on June 2, making it suddenly quite important to the Democratic race.

As of this writing, June 2 would confer a trove of delegates so large it would be second only to Super Tuesday in early March. And as such, the June Tuesday that was once an afterthought could now represent Mr. Biden’s first chance to clinch the presidential nomination.

We are keeping a running update of major changes for the election, including rescheduled primaries and caucuses.

For a full list of which states are voting when, take a look at our primary election calendar.

Wisconsin is plowing ahead with plans to vote on April 7. Now the governor wants to send everyone an absentee ballot in under two weeks.

In a political memo, our colleague Matt Flegenheimer observed that the election-year calendar seemed set in stone — until suddenly it wasn’t.

For us, just as for so many of you, the coronavirus outbreak has been and will continue to be front of mind when it comes to news. Our politics team will continue to vigorously cover the 2020 race and all of the ways it is being affected by the pandemic, and we urge you to keep reading. But for now, this weekly roundup will go on hiatus. We hope we can rejoin you when things get a little bit more back to normal.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — When Representative Thomas Massie heard that House leaders wanted to pass a $2 trillion stimulus measure to respond to the coronavirus without so much as a recorded vote, he swung into outraged action.

He got into his black Tesla on Wednesday and began the drive from his home in northeastern Kentucky to the Capitol, determined to object to its quick passage and insist that lawmakers show up in person — in defiance of public health advice — to register their support or opposition.

“I came here to make sure our republic doesn’t die by unanimous consent and empty chamber,” he said on the House floor on Friday.

Mr. Massie, the libertarian whose contrarian streak has earned him the moniker “Mr. No,” ultimately failed when House leaders in both parties united to deflect his stunt, assembling enough lawmakers in the chamber for a quorum and allowing the bill to pass by voice vote after all. President Trump signed the bill later in the afternoon, sending direct payments and jobless aid to taxpayers, help to states and hospitals battling the disease, and government bailouts to businesses battered by the crisis.

But putting down his one-man revolt required scores of House members to scramble late Thursday to return to Washington from all corners of the country, infuriated and terrified as they put their health on the line amid a rapidly spreading pandemic to grudgingly board empty flights or drive back to the Capitol.

Mr. Massie has never been one of the more beloved members of the House, but on Friday, he became in short order its most reviled representative, bringing together Democrats and Republicans — who had spent days fighting bitterly over the economic aid bill — around shared contempt for one man.

“Looks like a third rate Grandstander named @RepThomasMassie, a Congressman from, unfortunately, a truly GREAT state, Kentucky, wants to vote against the new Save Our Workers Bill in Congress,” President Trump wrote in his first of two Twitter rebukes, in which he suggested that Mr. Massie should be expelled from the Republican Party. “He just wants the publicity.”

Not long after, John Kerry, the former secretary of state and Democratic presidential nominee, took to Twitter himself to declare that Mr. Massie “has tested positive for being an asshole,” and should “be quarantined to prevent the spread of his massive stupidity.”

“Never knew John Kerry had such a good sense of humor!” Mr. Trump quipped in a rare showing of bipartisan camaraderie. “Very impressed!”

A reporter happened upon a bipartisan venting of spleen against Mr. Massie in the driveway outside the Capitol, in which Senator Dan Sullivan, Republican of Alaska, was overheard telling Representative Sean Patrick Maloney, Democrat of New York, of the Kentuckian: “What a dumbass.”

“I can confirm that @RepThomasMassie is indeed a dumbass,” Mr. Maloney tweeted, confirming the conversation.

House leaders had planned to pass the mammoth government aid package by voice vote in an effort to allow fewer representatives to return to Washington, reducing the health risk to lawmakers. But that method can be easily stymied by just one vocal objector, and despite behind-the-scenes pleas delivered to the Kentucky Republican from members of his own party, Mr. Massie refused to commit to allowing it.

That meant Democratic and Republican leaders, betting that Mr. Massie would carry through on his threats, had to urge their members to come back to the Capitol to form a quorum, even as public health officials around the country advised against travel and large gatherings as a way of slowing the spread of Covid-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus.

They bet right.

“The Constitution requires that a quorum of members be present to conduct business in the House. Right now, millions of essential, working-class Americans are still required to go to work during this pandemic,” Mr. Massie said in a lengthy statement on Friday morning announcing that he would force a vote. “Is it too much to ask that the House do its job, just like the Senate did?”

A self-described constitutional conservative who has been known to sport a tie bearing the Gadsden flag, Mr. Massie, 49, often takes lonely stands. He routinely tweets contrarian takes using the hashtag #SassyWithMassie. In 2014, Mr. Massie derailed a bill the House was about to pass by voice vote to award an honor to the golf legend Jack Nicklaus by demanding every lawmaker go on the record about whether they supported such a commendation.

Awarding a medal to Mr. Nicklaus, Mr. Massie argued, “is not a good use of our resources,” adding that the golfer “didn’t die on the golf course.”

His unwillingness to bend on even the smallest issue has charmed a slew of powerful conservative groups, including the Club for Growth and FreedomWorks. His closest friends on Capitol Hill are Representative Justin Amash, the Republican turned independent from Michigan who is also a frequent invoker of constitutional principle, and Senator Rand Paul, Republican of Kentucky.

Mr. Paul provoked the ire of his colleagues this week for continuing to work in the Capitol while awaiting coronavirus test results that came back as positive. (Mr. Massie, in a nod to his friendship with Mr. Paul, for years sported a “Stand With Rand” decal on his Tesla.)

But that approach found few admirers on Friday. His primary race challenger, Todd McMurtry, who has accused Mr. Massie of being insufficiently supportive of Mr. Trump, eagerly seized on the president’s comments, saying he agreed with Mr. Trump’s assessment that Mr. Massie was “a disaster for America.”

Nor were Mr. Massie’s colleagues — a majority of them older or with a pre-existing health condition — amused. Many were privately terrified of the health risks of traveling. Shingles and lice, one senior Democratic aide said, were more popular than Mr. Massie.

The normally affable Representative Dean Phillips, Democrat of Minnesota, used Twitter to confront him, tagging Mr. Massie in his broadside.

“If you intend to delay passage of the #coronavirus relief bill tomorrow morning, please advise your 428 colleagues RIGHT NOW,” Mr. Phillips wrote, “so we can book flights and expend ~$200,000 in taxpayer money to counter your principled but terribly misguided stunt.”

A handful of Mr. Massie’s allies defended him on Friday and directly appealed to Mr. Trump.

Mr. Massie “is a good man and a solid conservative,” Representative Paul Gosar, Republican of Arizona, wrote on Twitter. “He believes in the Constitution strongly.”

Mr. Gosar added: “We won’t always agree on strategy or policy. But he doesn’t warrant this dressing down. Thomas—Hang tough brother.”

Representative Chip Roy, Republican of Texas, told Mr. Trump on Twitter to “back off.”

“He is defending the Constitution today by requiring a quorum,” Mr. Roy wrote. “There’s nothing 3rd rate about that, @realDonaldTrump. I may miss vote if he forces roll call (flights) but it will pass.”

But the overriding sentiment among lawmakers on Friday may have been best put by Representative Peter T. King, Republican of New York, who also aired his grievances on Twitter, even as he called passage of the stimulus bill a “Victory for America.”

“Large number of Congress Members had to be in House Chamber and risk infection to themselves & others because of 1 arrogant Member,” Mr. King fumed. “If anyone gets infected, blood is on @RepThomasMassie’s hands!”

<|endoftext|>


	Download county-level data for coronavirus cases in the United States from The New York Times on GitHub.


As the coronavirus has spread across the United States, killing hundreds of people and sickening tens of thousands more, comprehensive data on the extent of the outbreak has been difficult to come by.

No single agency has provided the public with an accurate, up-to-date record of coronavirus cases, tracked to the county level. To fill the gap, The New York Times has launched a round-the-clock effort to tally every known coronavirus case in the United States. The data, which The Times will continue to track, is being made available to the public on Friday.

Individual states and counties have tracked their own cases and presented them to the public with varying degrees of speed and accuracy, but those tallies provide only limited snapshots of the nation’s outbreak. A publicly available tracker from the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, updated five times a week, includes only state-level data. Other entities have made efforts, including a notable one by Johns Hopkins University, to track cases worldwide or within the United States.

In late January, not long after the first known case was reported in Washington State, The Times began tracking each known U.S. case as counties and states began reporting results of testing. Such testing, which had been delayed, gradually became more widely available. For the last eight weeks, a team of Times journalists has recorded an array of details — locations, dates, ages and conditions, when possible — about newly confirmed cases reported by state and local officials.

By Friday morning, The Times had tracked more than 85,000 cases in all 50 states, the District of Columbia and three U.S. territories. There have been more known cases in the United States than in China, Italy or any other country, and more than 1,200 people have died in the United States. Researchers, scientists, government officials and business executives have requested access to the information. The Times is releasing its data publicly in an effort to broaden understanding of the virus’s toll.

“We hope the data set can help inform the ongoing public health response to the pandemic and ultimately, save lives,” said Dean Baquet, the executive editor of The Times. “We believe the data may help reveal how Covid-19 has spread through communities and clusters; which geographic areas may be hit the hardest; and how its spread in hard-hit areas may offer clues for regions that could face wider outbreaks in the future.”

The tracking has shown how quickly a single known case can mushroom into an uncontrolled outbreak, as has happened in Louisiana.

The database has shown how the detection of a small cluster in one area, like New Rochelle, N.Y., can precede the discovery of thousands more cases in nearby cities and states.

And it has shown, with tragic frequency, how vulnerable older adults are to the worst of the virus. Public health officials have linked at least 37 deaths to the Life Care nursing facility in Kirkland, Wash. The Times has also tracked outbreaks at other nursing and senior living facilities in Washington State, Colorado, Florida and Louisiana.

The goal of the tracking was to compile a historical record, with as much detail about individual patients as can be obtained, of the largest public health crisis in modern American history. By collecting the data continuously, and from multiple levels of government, The Times has been able to map the spread of the virus, with updated information published several times a day.

The Times’s database has already informed academic research that showed how the virus might be slowed, and what might happen if it is not. In the weeks and months ahead, it is our hope that the data can continue to inform researchers, policymakers and journalists as they seek to understand how this pandemic evaded containment, how it still might be mitigated and how similar disasters might be avoided in the future.

The tracking effort grew from a handful of Times correspondents to a large team of journalists that includes experts in data and graphics, staff news assistants and freelance reporters, as well as journalism students from Northwestern University, the University of Missouri and the University of Nebraska-Lincoln. The reporting continues nearly all day and night, seven days a week, across U.S. time zones, to record as many details as possible about every case in real time. The Times is committed to collecting as much data as possible in connection with the outbreak and is collaborating with the University of California, Berkeley, on an effort in that state.

In tracking the cases, the reporting process is labor-intensive but straightforward much of the time. But with dozens of states and hundreds of local health departments using their own reporting methods — and sometimes moving patients from county to county or state to state with no explanation — judgment calls have sometimes been required.

When the federal government arranged flights to the United States for Americans exposed to the coronavirus in China and Japan, The Times recorded their cases in the states where they subsequently were treated, even though local health departments generally did not.

When a resident of Florida died in Los Angeles, we recorded her death as having occurred in California, though officials in Florida counted her case in their own records. When officials in some states reported new cases without immediately identifying where they were being treated, our team attempted to add county information later, once it became available.

This accounting is an attempt to record how and where the coronavirus has spread across the United States. But it is a product of a fragmented American public health system in which overwhelmed officials at the state or local level have sometimes struggled to report accurately and consistently.

On several occasions, officials have corrected information hours or days after they first reported it. Or cases have disappeared from a local database. Or states have created confusing, sometimes duplicative ways of tracking the cases of people who became ill while traveling. In those instances, which have become more common as caseloads have increased, The Times has sought to reflect the most current, accurate information while ensuring that every known case, each of them representing someone’s loved one, is counted.

<|endoftext|>

The director of the federal health department’s civil rights office said on Saturday that his office was opening a series of civil rights investigations to ensure that states did not allow medical providers to discriminate on the basis of disabilities, race, age or certain other factors when deciding who would receive lifesaving medical care during the coronavirus emergency.

The office released a new bulletin on civil rights during the coronavirus crisis, days after disability rights advocates filed complaints arguing that protocols to ration lifesaving medical care adopted by Alabama and Washington State were discriminatory.

“Our civil rights laws protect the equal dignity of every human life from ruthless utilitarianism,” Roger Severino, the office’s director, said in a news release. “Persons with disabilities, with limited English skills and older persons should not be put at the end of the line for health care during emergencies.”

Mr. Severino said in an interview that in response to multiple complaints, his office was opening the investigations to ensure that state-mandated rationing plans “are fully compliant with civil rights law.” He said his office had heard from “a broad spectrum of civil rights groups, pro-life groups, disability rights groups, from prominent members of Congress from both sides of the aisle, from ordinary people who are concerned about their civil rights in this time of crisis.”

The bulletin “represents an important first step in protecting the rights of people with disabilities in the current crisis,” said Ari Ne’eman, a visiting scholar at the Lurie Institute for Disability Policy at Brandeis University and a senior research associate at the Harvard Law School Project on Disability. He said there was an “urgent need for comprehensive guidance.”

Many states and hospitals are developing plans for how to ration care if the number of critically ill coronavirus patients exceeds capacity. Patients who develop severe respiratory distress from coronavirus infection often require support from mechanical ventilators for days to weeks; the machines are expected to be in short supply in the United States. In Italy, doctors have had to make wrenching choices about who gets them and who does not. While attempts are made to increase production of new ventilators and to expand hospital capacity, these plans lay out who will get care if those efforts are not able to meet the need.

Many of the plans would prioritize patients who were most likely to survive their immediate illness, and who also had a better chance of long-term survival when taking other factors into consideration. Some assign patients a score based on calculations of their level of illness, with decisions between patients who have the same score made by random selection.

Some plans instruct hospitals not to offer mechanical ventilators to people above a certain age or with particular health conditions.

In Alabama’s plan, people with “severe or profound mental retardation” as well as “moderate to severe dementia” should be considered “unlikely candidates for ventilator support” during a period of rationing. Washington’s guidance recommends that triage teams consider transferring hospital patients with “loss of reserves in energy, physical ability, cognition and general health” to outpatient or palliative care.

Dr. Kathy Lofy, the health officer of Washington State, said in an email, “We are very concerned that people believe our scarce resource guidance might discriminate against people with disabilities so we are in the process of setting up time to meet with disability advocacy groups to discuss their concerns.”

“The guidance in Washington around managing scarce resources during emergencies was largely designed to avoid discrimination during the allocation of scarce resource and involves a regional team to ensure resources are being allocated in a fair way,” Dr. Lofy said.

An emailed statement from the Alabama health department said that the state’s ventilator triage guidelines had been “greatly misunderstood” and were “solely intended as a tool for providers” making difficult choices. The statement said the document, which remained on its website on Saturday, was over a decade old and had since been replaced by a more comprehensive set of guidelines for health care emergencies. Those newer guidelines did not address ventilator triage, but said that the allocation of care should not be discriminatory.

Dr. Doug White, who published a proposed framework for rationing critical care in the Journal of the American Medical Association on Friday, said in a webinar that it was important to have “triage guidelines that don’t exclude groups of patients.” He said a score-based approach, endorsed by Pennsylvania, would allow as many patients to be treated as possible, so that “if suddenly 1,000 new ventilators become available, nobody’s sitting without a ventilator.”

Still, some citizen groups who have looked at draft protocols expressed fears that even using predicted survival to determine who would get access to resources — the most common strategy — might be inherently discriminatory.

In a report of a community exercise held in Seattle, some participants said they were concerned that using the likelihood of survival as a rationing criterion was problematic because some groups, such as African-Americans and immigrants, might have poorer health as a result of “institutional racism in the health care system.”

The plans typically include protocols for removing ventilators from people after a certain time period if they do not appear to be improving. In some states, including New York, people who required ventilators long-term, such as those who have certain spinal cord injuries, could be subject to having their ventilators reassigned under the protocol if they were admitted to hospitals during the crisis.

Many of the plans, even if they do not include outright age restrictions, consider stage of life as a factor in assigning ventilators or critical care beds. The civil rights office’s new statement might put that into question.

Mr. Severino said that his office was not telling states how to allocate care, but that the bulletin “puts entities on notice that they need to start considering the civil rights implications of any crisis standards of care plans they may be putting into effect if it were to come to that.”

“It has to be part of the discussion,” he continued.

If the country reached a point where health care rationing standards would be applied, Mr. Severino said, “those standards must comply with civil rights laws.”

“Ultimately the question as to resource allocation is not a scientific or medical one,” he added. “It is ultimately a moral and legal one.”

The bulletin had an important new legal provision. It said that a March 17 declaration by the Secretary of Health and Human Services that provided immunity from legal liability to those developing or using “medical countermeasures” to fight the disease might also provide some immunity from civil rights claims.

Mr. Ne’eman said that finding was “deeply concerning,” adding that “enforcement of our civil rights laws should never be called into question, even in the context of an emergency.”

Mr. Severino said he was “unaware” of any time in which the federal health authorities had placed any limitations on civil rights laws during an emergency. He referred questions about the provision to the Office of the General Counsel, which did not immediately respond to a request to comment on it.

“I want to make sure in this time of crisis, we don’t forget the foundational principles that are part of what makes America so special,” Mr. Severino said. “That we do care for everybody, that every person in America deserves equal dignity and respect.”

He added, “Our response will be a reflection of our national character.”

<|endoftext|>

Twitter on Wednesday temporarily locked the account of a conservative website after it promoted an article suggesting that the medical community should consider intentionally infecting people with the coronavirus at “chickenpox parties” to help slow the spread of the virus.

The article, titled “How Medical ‘Chickenpox Parties’ Could Turn The Tide Of The Wuhan Virus,” argued that a “controlled voluntary infection” program could allow young people to return to work after contracting and recovering from the virus.

Such a strategy, the article stated, could promote “herd immunity” and help save the economy.

Many figures on the right have expressed concern about the toll on the economy from prolonged social distancing and from the closing of businesses. President Trump on Tuesday said he would “love to have the country opened up, and just raring to go, by Easter,” a timeline that top health professionals said was far too soon.

Twitter said the article posted by the conservative website, The Federalist, as well as a tweet about it, violated the company’s rules, which ban content that flouts the recommendations of public health officials on the coronavirus.

The company’s policy requires the removal of tweets that encourage people to disregard social distancing guidelines or that describe “harmful treatments or protection measures which are known to be ineffective.”

The action comes as misinformation about the virus has spread rapidly on social media, frustrating companies like Facebook, Google and Twitter that have worked aggressively to stop the promotion of “miracle cures” and other false information.

The Federalist promoted the article to its more than 230,000 followers with a tweet that read it was “time to think outside the box.”

Twitter then locked The Federalist’s account until the tweet was removed. The article was still posted on The Federalist’s website as of Wednesday night.

Benjamin Domenech, the publisher of The Federalist, and Mollie Hemingway, a senior editor, did not immediately respond to emails seeking comment on Wednesday.

Dr. Douglas A. Perednia, who wrote the article, said he disagreed with Twitter’s action.

“I don’t think they read the article,” he said. “They may be reacting to the headline, but they’re not reading the article itself.”

Dr. Perednia of Portland, Ore., described himself as a recently retired medical internist who also trained in dermatology.

Dr. Perednia’s article was published a day after Gov. Andy Beshear of Kentucky announced that a young person in that state had tested positive for the virus after attending a “coronavirus party” held in defiance of social distancing guidelines.

Dr. Perednia’s article suggested “allowing people at low risk for severe complications to deliberately contract Covid-19 in a socially and medically responsible way so they become immune to the disease.”

Such a strategy, the article stated, “could be a powerful tool for both suppressing the Wuhan coronavirus and saving the economy.”

“It could reduce the danger of passing Covid-19 to vulnerable populations, drastically reduce the amount of social isolation needed, reopen businesses and even help achieve the level of ‘herd immunity’ needed to stop the spread of the disease within the population,” Dr. Perednia wrote.

Some medical professionals strongly disagreed.

Dr. Arthur L. Caplan, a medical ethicist at New York University’s Grossman School of Medicine, said that so little was known about who was truly at low-risk for infection and why that such a program could lead to a surge in deaths.

“It is dangerous and irresponsible,” he said. “To run around saying, ‘I’m going to take a lethal virus and deliberately infect you to build your immunity’ not only makes no medical sense, it gets pretty close to advising homicide.”

Dr. Andrew A. Lover, an assistant professor of epidemiology at the University of Massachusetts-Amherst, called the article “exceedingly ill-advised and not evidence-based in any way shape or form.”

But some doctors said it might be worth exploring strategies other than social distancing to combat the spread of the pandemic.

Dr. Daniel J. Morgan, a professor of epidemiology and public health at the University of Maryland School of Medicine, said he would not endorse intentionally infecting people, but added that it was worth considering ways to increase herd immunity while protecting vulnerable patients.

“I think that we do need to be open-minded about all potential ideas if we don’t see a great effect from social distancing,” he said. “What do we do during the next phase of this?”

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — After a four-year stretch marked by an acrimonious fight over a Supreme Court vacancy, the poisonous Kavanaugh confirmation and a bitter impeachment trial, was it too much to hope that a global health and economic crisis could suddenly rid the Senate of its own partisan infection?

It was.

True, the Senate voted 96 to 0 late Wednesday night to deliver a sweeping $2 trillion response to the coronavirus pandemic, a remarkable show of unanimity for the biggest government aid package in history. The House passed the measure and sent it to President Trump on Friday after having to hustle lawmakers into town to overcome a sudden Republican threat to hold it up.

The outcome was never in doubt. Members of Congress are as worried as every other American about the pandemic, and have the power and the money to do something about it, so significant action was inevitable. Lawmakers also knew they would be quickly run out of office if they failed to respond adequately to the gravest national health emergency in a century.

The test was in both the final contents of the package and how members of the Senate, which took the lead on assembling wide-ranging legislation that touched nearly every facet of the economy and the health care system, would get it done. Could they come together as they did in the days after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks and put aside their political differences in a show of strength and solidarity, or would they continue to wage the political war that has been intensifying for years?

transcript

Are you kidding me? This is the moment to debate new regulations that have nothing whatsoever to do with this crisis? That’s what they’re up to over there. American people need to know it. Democrats won’t let us fund hospitals or save small businesses unless they get to dust off the Green New Deal. I’d like to see Senate Democrats tell New York City doctors and nurses, who are literally overrun as we speak, that they’re filibustering hospital funding and more masks because they want to argue with the airlines over their carbon footprint. We’ve been working on a few outstanding issues that are no surprise to everyone. From the very beginning, Democrats have insisted on a Marshall Plan for our medical system: more money for hospitals, community health centers, nursing homes and urgent medical supplies like gloves and masks. You know what the American people are thinking right now, Mr. President? They’re thinking that this country was founded by geniuses, but it’s being run by a bunch of idiots. You know what the American people are thinking right now, Mr. President? They’re thinking, Why do the members of the United States Senate continue to double down on stupid? I’d like to suggest to my friends on both sides of the aisle that we first assume the appropriate distance and then secondly take a deep breath. The emotions that we’ve seen on the floor on both sides of the aisle are reflected in homes across America, where families are very emotional at this moment. The country is burning. The country is burning, and your side wants to play political games. It’s time to get this done. The American people expect us to act. They need action. We need to work together to get this done for the American people. Is there objection? Thank you, Mr. President. I object. Oh, come on. I object. The Democratic leader’s objection is heard. This is unbelievable.

On the floor, at least, it was the latter. Glowering senators, hands on hips and fingers wagging, spent a good part of three days castigating one another across the aisle as Democrats held up the emergency aid to wring what they saw as essential concessions from the White House.

The accusations and the tone were ugly. Democrats accused Republicans of being callous and trying to jam through legislation that would have enabled corporate corruption while giving short shrift to American workers. Republicans stepped it up a notch and essentially accused Democrats of killing their fellow citizens.

“When you will look back on this in a day — in a week, in a month — you will just ask: How many deaths could have been prevented if this bill had been passed yesterday instead of today,” Senator John Barrasso of Wyoming, the No. 3 Senate Republican, said on the floor as he pounded Democrats for blocking the measure.

The whole episode was discouraging to longtime senators such as Pat Roberts, the veteran Kansas Republican who is retiring.

“This is not the Senate I came to 24 years ago,” he lamented. “This blanket of comity and respect is pretty threadbare right now.”

In some ways, the legislative dynamic was a reverse of the situation 12 years ago when the House, in fits of acrimony and blame, got tied in knots over the 2008 economic rescue and left it to the Senate to more calmly go about its business despite deep divisions of its own. This time, it was the Senate that became bogged down in fighting while the House seemed more grown up — something no self-respecting senator ever wants to contemplate.

Perhaps the most troubling aspect of the toxic spectacle that unfolded on the floor was how manufactured all the outrage appeared to be. Negotiations were continuing just steps away in the leadership offices of both Republicans and Democrats, and virtually everyone knew that there was going to be a resolution at some point soon — though majority Republicans were up in arms that Democrats were using their leverage to extract more of what they wanted. The harsh attacks — and the Republican suggestion that Democrats were pushing extraneous provisions that really were not part of the relevant negotiations — were in some ways pure political theater.

“Frankly, I think what has been happening on the floor today has been sort of artificial and hasn’t really shown the American public what is truly going on,” Senator Tim Kaine, Democrat of Virginia, said in a speech on Monday. “There were a lot of speeches that were taking place wherein it was sort of a blame game, and I don’t think that is what Americans wanted to see today.”

“What Americans didn’t see yesterday and today is the intense dialogue and debate and discussion around the third coronavirus response bill — by far the largest,” Mr. Kaine said.

One reason for the furious show of partisanship was obvious: Senators are engaged in a fierce battle for control of the chamber in November. Several Republican incumbents are in serious trouble and were not going to miss the opportunity to try to score points against Democrats for irresponsibility and to show voters back home they were fighting the good fight in Washington. With Senator Chuck Schumer of the New York, the Democratic leader, organizing the campaign against them, Republicans were particularly agitated when discussing him. Mr. Schumer, who was at the center of the negotiations, drives Republicans into a frenzy.

“People are dying, and the Democratic leaders think it an opportunity to score political points and grab power,” said Senator Martha McSally, a highly endangered Republican from Arizona, who took the floor to accuse Mr. Schumer of “flat-out lies.”

“It is despicable. It is infuriating. It is immoral, and it must stop,” she said of the delay.

There were some bright spots, almost all of them behind the scenes. Given the rare opportunity to legislate, Republican and Democratic Senate committee leaders did come together to quickly draft major emergency aid efforts. Members of the Small Business Committee, not usually a hotbed of Senate action, were but one example.

Having watched the crisis tear through China and Italy, Senator Marco Rubio, Republican of Florida, who leads the panel, and Senator Ben Cardin of Maryland, the top Democrat on the committee, began working on their own plan in late February. They were joined by Senator Susan Collins, Republican of Maine and a former Small Business Administration official, and Senator Jeanne Shaheen, Democrat of New Hampshire, in producing a new $377 billion program to provide forgivable loans to small businesses.

But such successes also came with issues, as Democrats complained they were later blindsided by a provision added to the small-business package that was meant to make sure that nonprofit groups such as Planned Parenthood received none of the money.

Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader, sought to focus on the big picture of the passage without dissent of the huge bill in such a short period of time — though he noted some “stupidity” on the floor from the Democratic side.

“If I were writing your headline, I’d say the Senate has pivoted from one of the most contentious partisan periods in the nation’s history to passing this rescue package 100 to nothing,” he told reporters after approval of the measure, referring to the impeachment trial. “I think it says a lot about the United States Senate as an institution, our willingness to put aside our differences, and to do something really significant for the country.”

Senators did do something consequential, but they were a long way from putting aside their differences. They seem to have more and more trouble doing so, a fact that does not bode well if the partisanship remains so intense even in times of crisis.

<|endoftext|>

While the president of the United States is often referred to as the most powerful leader on earth, there are limits to those powers, and one of them is that he cannot order Americans to leave their homes and go to work.

Such a declaration, in the midst of a health crisis, would have to come from local authorities — in state capitals or even from city or county governments.

This longstanding legal principle predates the Constitution, experts say, so Mr. Trump can suggest what counties may go back to work as he did in his announcement on Thursday, but he does not have the authority to overturn state and local decrees.

“States are understood to have a general power to legislate for the health, welfare, safety and morals for the people of their state,” said Andrew Kent, who teaches constitutional law at Fordham University’s School of Law.

There might be some exceptions, Mr. Kent and others noted, as in the case of a military invasion or other national emergency, but a pandemic is not one of them. On health matters, the federal government’s powers are limited to trying to prevent the spread of contagious diseases into the United States or between states.

That formula, giving each state control over the “health, welfare, safety and morals” of its residents is woven into countless legal precedents.

An 1873 Supreme Court decision, for example, upheld the right of Louisiana to shut down a private slaughterhouse on the Mississippi River north of New Orleans to control cholera outbreaks.

Mr. Trump could try to use his considerable levers of power like withholding federal aid, as he did with the sanctuary cities that opposed his immigration policies, legal experts said, but states could reject any direct attempt to interfere in their shelter-at-home orders.

“He has no power to go directly into a state and to tell a business operating in that state that it has to open or change its operations in any way,” said Lawrence O. Gostin, a professor at Georgetown University Law School who specializes in public health law.

<|endoftext|>

This article was produced in partnership with the Pulitzer Center on Crisis Reporting.

WASHINGTON — The military judge presiding in the Sept. 11 death penalty trial at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, has scheduled his retirement for later this year, in the latest blow to efforts to start the long-running trial in 2021.

The judge, Col. W. Shane Cohen, wrote in a one-page letter to the chief war court judge that he was ending his 21 years of Air Force service on July 1. Unless another judge is appointed sooner, he wrote, April 24 would be his last day presiding in the case against Khalid Shaikh Mohammed and four other men who are accused of orchestrating the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks that killed 2,976 people in New York, Pennsylvania and at the Pentagon.

The looming departure of the judge, coupled with a current shutdown of legal team access to the United States Navy base prison zone because of the coronavirus pandemic, cast a shadow on the prospects of meeting the target start date of Jan. 11, 2021. A new judge has to be chosen, and he or she will need time to read the more than 33,150-page transcript of the case as well as hundreds of legal filings, some still awaiting rulings.

Colonel Cohen’s decision to leave the case also comes as he has been hearing testimony — and has scheduled more witnesses — in an ongoing set of hearings on the defense lawyers’ requests to exclude from the trial the F.B.I. interrogations of the men in 2007. The defense lawyers say those interrogations are tainted by the torture the defendants endured during their three and four years in secret C.I.A. prisons.

Although two psychologists who waterboarded Mr. Mohammed and designed the agency’s interrogation techniques as contractors testified earlier this year, their testimony has not yet been completed.

In his letter, dated March 17, Colonel Cohen said he was acting in “the best interests of my family and was not impacted by any outside influence from any source.” In an open session of the war court on June 17, Colonel Cohen told a defense lawyer that he believed “a court of this magnitude” needed “some level of continuity” that would “allow this case to move forward and for some continuity in rulings by the military judge.”

Colonel Cohen, the third judge in the case, was the first to set a trial date and an aggressive hearing and trial schedule that would have required long stretches of time at the remote Navy base in southeast Cuba. In recent hearings, he had begun to suggest that the trial itself could start later than January 2021 and increased his trial time estimate to 12 to 13 months from his initial nine-month prediction.

The judge’s decision comes at a time of uncertainty about trial preparation during the coronavirus pandemic. Guantánamo this week disclosed that a sailor there was the first of its 6,000 residents to test positive for Covid-19, the disease caused by the virus.

Terry Rockefeller, who lost her sister Laura in the 2001 attack on the World Trade Center, said she was “outraged and deeply concerned about the likelihood of further delay. Judge Cohen purported to be committed to seeing the 9/11 trial through to a conclusion.”

The prison over the weekend halted legal meetings for all 40 wartime prisoners there.

All of the legal team members are based in the United States. Under a new policy, instituted in response to the virus outbreak, lawyers who obtain “mission essential status” to take a Navy air shuttle to Guantánamo must remain in isolation for two weeks at housing near the airstrip before being allowed to cross Guantánamo Bay to the site of the prison.

As of Wednesday, no prisoner had the virus, according to S. Maria Lohmeyer, a Navy commander and a spokeswoman for detention operations.

She said the guards and other detention center staff had planned “for weeks” and rehearsed “for the possibility of Covid-19,” including “scenarios that would require isolation.” She did not provide specifics but said the prison leadership had “implemented a layered defense that includes prevention and precautionary measures.”

<|endoftext|>

SAN JOSE, Calif. — When the first case of the coronavirus in Silicon Valley was discovered in late January, health officials were faced with a barrage of questions: What city did the patient live in? Whom had he come in contact with? Which health clinic had he visited before he knew he was infected?

Dr. Sara Cody, the chief health officer for Santa Clara County, which has a population of two million across 15 cities, declined to give details.

“I can’t give the city,” she said, adding “we are not going to be giving out information about where he sought health care.”

As the coronavirus spreads across the United States the limited disclosure of data by officials would seem to be a footnote to the suffering and economic disruptions that the disease is causing.

But medical experts say that how much the public should know has become a critical question that will help determine how the United States confronts this outbreak and future ones.

Residents are clamoring to see whether the virus has been detected in their neighborhoods so they can take more steps to avoid any contact. American researchers are starved for data, unlike their colleagues in other countries who are harnessing rivers of information from their more centralized medical systems. And local politicians complain that they cannot provide basic information on the spread of the virus to their constituents.

In the perennial tug-of-war between privacy and transparency in the United States, privacy appears to be winning in the coronavirus pandemic.

The bare-minimum approach to public disclosures in places like the San Francisco Bay Area is common across the United States. Armed with emergency powers in many areas, public health officers have vast discretion over what information they want, and do not want, to release to the public. Coronavirus cases in California are often listed by county, generally with very little additional information — such as gender, city of residence or age — provided.

Critics of the threadbare public reporting say it is striking that even in Silicon Valley, which is home to leading technology companies that thrive off the collection of data, residents are given very little information about the movement and dynamics of the virus.

California, which has more than 4,600 cases, is a microcosm for how inconsistent the distribution of information has been during the pandemic. Los Angeles County provides a rough age distribution of patients and breaks down the cases into more than 140 cities and communities. On Friday, for example, the county reported 21 cases in Beverly Hills, 28 in the city of Santa Monica and 49 in the neighborhood of Melrose.

Across the United States there is even less consistency. New York is listing cases by age bracket, gender and borough despite calls for more localized reporting. Connecticut lists data by town. Florida provides its residents with a wealth of data on the pandemic. The state’s Department of Health has a detailed dashboard and reports showing the spread of the virus — rich with data on the cities affected, the number of people tested, the age brackets of patients, whether they are Florida residents, and the number of cases in nursing homes.

Health departments in the Bay Area make the case that releasing more granular data could heighten discrimination against certain communities where there might be clusters. The first cases in the Bay Area were among ethnic Chinese residents returning from trips to China.

“Pandemics increase paranoia and stigma,” said Dr. Rohan Radhakrishna, the deputy health officer of Contra Costa County, across the Bay from San Francisco, which provides only the total number of cases in the county on its website. “We must be extra cautious in protecting individuals and the community.”

In Santa Clara, health officials say they cannot disclose how many cases are found in each city because of the nation’s strict medical privacy law, the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, or HIPAA, signed by President Bill Clinton in 1996.

But that law was designed for the protection of personal data at doctors’ offices and in hospitals and includes provisions for the release of otherwise protected information during emergencies.

Using the law as a justification for limiting the release of aggregate data about the coronavirus is “ridiculous,” according to Arthur L. Caplan, a professor of bioethics at the N.Y.U. School of Medicine in New York City.

Prof. Caplan is among many experts who say the coronavirus is likely to spur a reassessment of medical privacy laws. Already, the Trump Administration waived some provisions of the law this month.

“HIPAA was written for a time when there were paper charts,” Prof. Caplan said. The coronavirus, he said, “will cause us to rethink a lot of things.”

“We will also have to plan for better data exchange and testing,” he said.

The U.S. approach contrasts sharply with that of Singapore and Taiwan, whose fights against the virus have been praised as among the most effective. Both governments make public the suspected linkages of cases, anonymized by numbers. In Singapore the authorities sometimes list neighborhoods where patients lived, their workplaces and churches or mosques that they attended.

I. Glenn Cohen, an expert in bioethics at Harvard Law School, says the guiding principle during this crisis should be sharing more rather than less.

“Public health depends a lot on public trust,” he said. “If the public feels as though they are being misled or misinformed their willingness to make sacrifices — in this case social distancing — is reduced.”

“That’s a strong argument for sharing as much information as you can,” he said.

Experts also point out that it was the government’s suppression of information about the virus in China that allowed it to spread quickly before measures were taken to stem it.

transcript

From The New York Times, I’m Michael Barbaro. This is “The Daily.”

Today: As the pandemic quickly spreads across the U.S., hundreds of hospitals are now confronting their first serious cases of the coronavirus. Susan Dominus on the lessons from the first confirmed case in New Jersey.

It’s Monday, March 30.

Sue, tell me how you first heard about James Cai.

Well, a few weeks ago I heard about this young guy, a 32-year-old physician assistant, who was the very first patient in all of New Jersey to test positive for Covid-19.

And so I reached out to him while he was still at the hospital. And I was sort of wondering, would it possibly be OK, could you maybe find some time to talk? And he said, sure, call me now. I’m in isolation, in other words, and I have time.

Hello? [COUGHING]

Are you there?

Yes. [COUGHING]

OK.

And what was the story that he told you?

So James lives and works in New York City.

So my name is James Cai, and I’m a physician assistant.

And his mother and grandfather live in New Jersey, and so he spends quite a bit of time there as well.

And I work as a primary care, urgent care and nursing home P.A.

He came to this country when he was about 16 from Shanghai. And he’s married and has a 20-month-old daughter, whom he adores.

Why did you go into medicine in the first place? Why were you drawn to medicine?

Oh, because of my grandparents. They are doctors. My grandfather is an anesthesiologist in Shanghai. And when I was young, I always sick, so I always went to his hospital. So I had a good impression.

And as someone working in the medical field, was James expecting to interact with this epidemic, the coronavirus? Was he maybe even thinking he would end up treating coronavirus patients?

Well, he doesn’t work in a hospital. And because he works in private practice, I think he probably imagined he might be working remotely — with telemedicine.

I actually heard about coronavirus many months ago when China had outbreak. But I always followed the disease.

But because of the family background and because he does work in medicine, when news of the coronavirus did start coming out of Wuhan, he definitely understood how quickly the virus could spread. And he definitely understood that the only way to guarantee that you could survive this was by not getting it in the first place.

Around end of February, I started to pile up all the food, like canned foods, frozen vegetables, dumplings.

So soon after the coronavirus landed on the west coast, he and his family went to Costco and stocked up —

Our family plan is to stay home for two months.

— for like, two months’ worth of supplies.

Right. So they were going to avoid any meaningful exposure to the virus?

Yeah, if there was communal spread and it had become widespread, their plan was to shelter in place.

And well ahead of the rest of us.

Yeah, I think that’s right.

So you weren’t sure at what point you would start doing that, but you felt you’d know when it was time?

Yes.

But, you know, he’s stocking up at the end of February. You know, people in the U.S. were still flying all over the country. Kids were going to school. Bloomberg was in the race for president. People were planning vacations and weddings and all sorts of conferences and events. And the same was true of James. So like everybody else, he’s going about his life. And around this time, without really too much concern about his health, he went to a medical conference in Times Square.

So I changed diaper for my daughter and gave her morning milk. And I kissed my wife and to go to conference.

On the fourth day of the conference, Monday, March 2, he comes down with a cough. And he starts to realize he’s actually getting sick.

I start to cough and a fever and tired.

So he leaves and texts his wife that he’s going to go to New Jersey, where his mom has a house. His mom’s away. And he doesn’t want to come home and get his wife and the baby sick.

Because of my daughter, when I went home, she always hugged me and kissed me. And she will catch it.

And what’s running through his head at this moment? Is he thinking, I have a bad cough? I might have the flu? Is coronavirus even on his mind?

Not really. I mean, there had not been a single case in all of New Jersey. He thought he probably had the flu. By then, he was mostly feeling this bad cough. He had an elevated heart rate. His eyes were really runny. He had diarrhea. He was not feeling well at all. But he also was not alarmed. You know, he decided to go to one of those drop-in centers to get a flu test, because he wanted to be told he didn’t have the flu so he could go home. So the doctor gives him a strep test and a flu test. They discuss whether he should get a coronavirus test, in fact, but the doctor didn’t have one. So they moved on. And the results came back that although the strep and the flu tests were negative, his symptoms were consistent with something called a pulmonary embolism, which is a clot in your lung that can be fatal.

So this could potentially be even more serious than just a seasonal flu or —

Yes. Certainly more serious than the flu.

So after, I went direct to the Hackensack emergency room.

So the doctor sends him to the E.R. at the Hackensack University Medical Center, which is not far from that doctor’s office.

And in the emergency room, they asked me questions. Asked me if I cough. I said, I do, I do have cough. I do have shortness of breath.

So as called for, the doctors do a CT scan. And after they do, they realize that, no, he does not have a pulmonary embolism. But that in fact, because of the symptoms he’s having and the way his lungs look in the scan —

They see a ground glass nodules. So this can be coronavirus.

— he might actually have coronavirus.

And how do the doctors at this hospital react to that?

Well, at this point, they haven’t seen any coronavirus patients. So they don’t seem to him terribly alarmed. That said, they do put him in a tiny isolation room, a windowless room on the floor of the emergency room. That’s where he spends the night, texting his friends and his wife and getting increasingly unnerved and feeling quite ill.

I was nervous. And at the same time, since I’m in the hospital, I’m going to check everything. Make sure I’m OK and then I go home.

So then on Tuesday, March 3, which is the second day in the hospital —

They decide to do a test on me. So the test takes about 24 hours or 48 hours.

— they do a Covid-19 test. And they tell him he’s going to have to wait a few days for the result, but he shouldn’t worry, he’s young and healthy. At the same time, he’s wildly Googling symptoms for Covid-19 and realizing that he has almost every one of them.

I had maybe lied to myself, was like, trying to calm myself down. I don’t have the Covid-19, I shouldn’t have it.

And so, it’s day three for James in the hospital. It’s Wednesday, March 4. He’s still waiting for the results in his tiny little room with a TV. And —

[SOUND OF LOCAL NEWS THEME]

— a local news report comes on.

We we begin tonight with breaking news regarding the coronavirus.

Yeah, that virus arriving in the Garden State tonight. Governor Phil Murphy announcing the first presumptive positive case of the virus right here in New Jersey.

And the news report says —

A man in his thirties is hospitalized in Bergen County.

There’s a guy in his thirties in Bergen County, which is where he is, who’s tested positive for coronavirus. It’s the first case in New Jersey.

Governor Murphy saying —

There’s even a tweet from the governor of New Jersey confirming it.

— “We take this situation very seriously and have been preparing for this for weeks. I urge residents to remain calm” —

And it occurs to James, they really might be talking about him.

And then I asked the doctor, saying, is this me? And the doctor’s saying, no, your test is not back yet.

And of course, he hasn’t heard anything about the results of his test yet?

No, he has not heard anything.

Wow. So you found out from the news from the governor of New Jersey?

Yes. On TV. And I asked the doctor. The doctor say, the result is not back yet.

And then the next day, his doctors come to him and say, yes, you have tested positive. And he is the first person in New Jersey to have tested positive for Covid-19.

Right. And perhaps the first person in the history of the universe to find out he has a disease, not from his doctor, but from TV news.

Let’s hope so.

And how does the hospital react in this moment?

So he’s really scared. But the hospital is telling him that he really has nothing to worry about. He’s a 32-year-old guy. He’s got no preexisting conditions.

Even Dr. [INAUDIBLE] was telling me, oh you’re so young. It’s like a flu.

In fact, one doctor even told him —

If it’s not because everybody is talking about corona, you can go home already.

You know, if it weren’t for all this attention about the coronavirus, you’d be home right now, just getting better in the comfort of your own bedroom.

In other words, it would probably just self-resolve in somebody of his health?

That was definitely the expectation.

I mean, that day, I was so depressed.

I think he felt that as a medical professional, he actually — he knew that he was quite vulnerable, that nobody was invulnerable. And there was this disconnect between his own concerns and their own insistence that he was overly anxious.

America is not ready.

It also dawns on him that he is the first person in this hospital to be treated for coronavirus.

I feel like, I’m in real trouble. Why I come to this hospital? Because I feel they don’t know how to treat this disease, and they don’t have deep understanding about this disease.

Nobody there has any experience. Nobody there can make good predictions. Nobody there has institutional knowledge about what happens when this goes wrong or something unexpected happens. He’s the first person, and that’s a very frightening position to be in.

We’ll be right back.

So Sue, James is newly diagnosed. He’s in isolation at this hospital in Hackensack, New Jersey. He’s been there for about four days. Physically, how is he doing at this point?

When you first got the results of the positive test, on a scale of 1 to 10, how bad did you feel physically? 10 being the worst?

I would say 10.

Wow.

He is feeling worse by the day.

Getting worse. So my heart is compensating, beating very fast.

He definitely has that cough. And he also is having real trouble breathing.

It’s like I’m in the water.

Tell me more about that.

It’s like, normally, we can just take very deep breaths in and out.

He describes it as that feeling when you’re underwater and you have to come up to gasp for breath, but you can’t quite get that oxygen that you want. And it’s very panicking feeling. It’s a very scary feeling.

So my lung is not allowing me to take deep breaths.

And how is the hospital treating him now that he’s officially tested positive?

They move him to a room with certain protections in place. And they’re keeping an eye on his numbers. And they’re giving him oxygen when he needs it. And he’s also keeping an eye on his numbers. And he’s worried, because he is not breathing well. And on Friday, March 6, his fifth day in the hospital, he worries that he is desaturating to a dangerous level.

And I desats.

He desats.

You desaturated.

And what does that mean, to desaturate?

It means that when you desaturate below a certain level, your blood is not getting enough oxygen from your lungs for you to function in a normal, healthy way. And this is really concerning to him.

You have pneumonia, it’s normal. Just use oxygen.

But he still has the sense that the hospital is telling him he’s overreacting, that he’s being too anxious. He’s going to recover just fine.

I was confused. And also, I was worried, because I think I’m not getting enough care. And my oxygen level dropped, and they — they cannot even see it.

And why do you think people in hospital are saying that? And maybe more importantly, why are they thinking that? Why are they insisting on being so calm about what it would mean to have an infection like this?

I would have to guess that it’s because the widespread impression that people had was that young people were not going to be terribly affected by this virus, and that it was going to feel like a very, very bad flu. And that he was going to recover just fine, just like the statistics supposedly said he was going to.

And did you actually feel yourself having difficulty breathing at that point?

I just feel tightness.

Tightness in your chest?

I feel like, a very scary — very scared. And I don’t know what to do next.

And James is all too aware that no one in that hospital has ever treated anyone with coronavirus. And he’s really worried about his symptoms, because he knows he’s feeling worse and worse every day.

So I told my cousin, I told everybody, and they just start searching. .

So he starts reaching out to friends of his who are plugged into the Chinese medical community, including his best friend, who’s a physician — and whom he calls his cousin — and his boss. And they start making phone calls and trying to get information from experienced people who can maybe share what they’ve learned.

Which is what?

You know, there’s advice that he should get high doses of vitamin C, there’s some discussion of whether he should get a steroid treatment if things get worse.

He translate the seventh edition.

They say that maybe he wants to look into antiviral medication. They tell him he shouldn’t wait too long before getting a second CT scan. But his doctors were really reluctant to do that.

Why was that?

They felt like they were giving him good care and that probably the results of the CT scan would not change that.

So James is more or less beginning to advise his own doctors on how to treat him, based on his research, based on his relationship with other medical professionals, which is pretty unusual.

Yes. Very unusual. And then the evening of the 7th, he starts desaturating to a level that really scares him. He’s concerned that if he desaturates to a certain degree, there could be no turning back. He’d have to be intubated, which definitely increases, you know, all of the risks of the illness. It would mean that a machine was going be doing all the breathing for him. It could lead to organ failure and in some cases, of course, death.

And I mean, if I intubated at night, I probably would just die by myself alone, without seeing the loved ones.

And his friends — also, some of them see this real urgency to save his life. And you know, one of his friends said to me that he personally felt responsible for making sure that the doctors took James’s case as seriously as possible. Here he is. He’s the first health care worker in New Jersey also to come down with Covid-19. If he didn’t make it, it was going to feel like the battle was over before it had even begun.

You always live in fear that you’re never going to wake up. And also, in isolation. And nobody can see you. So it’s very miserable. If people die, think about it, people die and they cannot see their loved ones. What — I mean, like, I feel like it’s very tough, right? For somebody to die alone.

You were scared. I mean, you were probably too weak to really speak forcefully, but you were letting them know that you felt that your life was on the line at this point.

Yeah.

And we don’t exactly know why, but on the 8th, he did get that second CT scan.

And it come back very bad.

It’s bad. He has pneumonia in both lungs. 30 to 40 percent of his lungs seem to be affected. That’s astonishing, that it would go from a small spot just a few days earlier to where it is now. And if he had gotten that bad in three days or four days since the last CT scan, how much worse was he going to be in another four days? And now, James starts to worry that he really might not survive this.

I was praying to everybody, to God, to Buddha, to everybody, saying, don’t let me die.

When I know my oxygen levels keep desaturating, one of my requests is can I see my mother and my wife or my daughter for the last time? It was that time, when my chest X-rays show so bad, and my oxygen level every day is dropping, and I would tell them that I have to be strong, but I don’t know how many days I can live.

And the good thing is, after the CT, they listened. When she saw second CT, she was like, OK, we have to treat you.

I spoke to a doctor at the hospital who was part of the team overseeing his care. And he said they’d been looking at the whole clinical picture, had recognized that he was declining even before the CT scan. But from James’s point of view, everything changed after the scan. He feels like, now they’re taking this very seriously and they’re listening to him. They’re coming around to seeing just how serious it is. And also recognizing that, yes, even a young person can get very, very sick with coronavirus. And they’re willing to try something.

And at this stage, what is he asking them to do?

So then a doctor in China recommend a high-flow machine.

James wants a few different types of treatment. He’s been advised that the doctors should try providing him a more intensive form of oxygen therapy. And he wants to go on three experimental antiviral medications — Kaletra, chloroquine and remdesivir. And at this point, he and the doctors at Hackensack and all the other doctors he’s working with are pretty much all on the same page. He finally gets the main things he’s been asking for.

And I think the next day, Dr. [INAUDIBLE] came in. He said, the medication’s here. We’re going to give it to you.

And finally, after more than a week in the hospital, James starts to turn around. He does start to feel better.

So after the first day, my fever finally dropped. And my oxygen stopped dropping.

I’m getting better and better every day. So that’s the whole thing.

And does he have a sense, do you have a sense, do his doctors have a sense of which of these treatments was responsible for that?

Not really. I mean, it might have been any one of the drugs, or all of the drugs, or the oxygen, or some combination of that. Or he might have just gotten better on his own. We really don’t know.

And so I asked you how you felt on a scale of 1 to 10, 10 being the worst, when you first got the results of the test, and you said that you were a 10. On a scale of 1 to 10, how do you feel now?

I would say now, maybe 3.

That’s pretty good.

Yeah, because I feel like all the symptoms have gone. I mean, I will be maybe no worry if tests come back negative. Then I know the virus is dead. Now, I don’t know if it is dead or not.

It’s now 10:37, and I need you to get a good night’s sleep. So I’m going to call you in the morning and see how your oxygen level were. Is that OK?

Yes. OK. Thank you.

All right. Thanks, James. Bye. Bye.

Good night. Bye-bye.

Sue, it feels — correct me if I’m wrong — like a big reason why James survived was because he was such an aggressive advocate for himself. And he had this network of expertise that he could tap into. He himself was a medical professional. And that that put him in a very strong position. But I wonder why the people around him in this hospital were not better prepared, given the stage of this pandemic when he arrived in Hackensack.

We don’t really know what saved his life, because these drugs are still in clinical trials. What we do know is that the entire story of coronavirus in this country is a story of lack of preparation. People did not believe that it simply was never going to be as bad here as it was in Wuhan or Milan. That is a universal story. It was hardly just these doctors at this hospital. I mean, part of it is that they are busy people. They are moving things really quickly. They are saving lives every day. In fact, we all know that they’re saving lives and putting their own lives on the line right now. But also, it is just hard to put yourself back in that moment — March 1, March 2 or the end of February — and remember how unlikely we all still hoped and believed, against all evidence, that this wasn’t going to be devastating here the way it was elsewhere.

Right.

That said, to their credit, the doctors at this hospital were open-minded and they were flexible and they were nimble. And they were willing to try whatever they could that was safe when they realized that whatever they had been doing definitely was not working. And I know James feels really appreciative, ultimately. He sent out a tweet that expressed his gratitude for the hospital saving, as he sees it, his life.

Sue, what do you think the lesson of this story is, of James, his very unique situation in these early days of the pandemic in the United States, and of what happened to him at this hospital?

One of the things that I’m hearing from doctors is that until you are in this moment and experiencing the onslaught of patients, it is very hard to imagine it. You can’t really know until you’re actually living it. And you know, every hospital in this country is likely to have its James. It’s going to have that first patient who comes in, who is really ill. They’re not exactly sure how to treat it. We still really don’t know how best to treat this virus. That is the hard, cold truth of it. There are some protocols that we hope will help, that are thought might help. But it’s unclear. It’s so new. And it’s going to be really hard for all those hospitals. And they’re going to have to make difficult choices. They’re going to have to make complicated ethical choices. They’re going to have to make decisions on the fly and build up their clinical experience. And it’s not going to be easy for any of them.

Sue, how is James doing at this point? I don’t know when the last time it was that you spoke with him, but what did he tell you?

He’s home. He is still in quarantine. So he still has not been able to see his wife or daughter. And his lungs are still recovering. It’s unclear just how fully they will recover. You know, it’s definitely a long road ahead of him. And at the same time, you know, he’s reading the news and he is feeling so lucky.

Lucky to be alive?

To be alive.

Thank you, Sue.

Thank you, Michael.

Hello?

Hi, James, it’s Sue. How are you doing?

I’m good.

Are you actually in your own home?

Yes.

How does it feel?

It feels great. I’m going to sleep on my own bed.

Fantastic.

Once I’m out of the hospital, I feel like I’m alive.

I feel like everything is so new to me. The grass, trees, cars, new people face, the sky. And then when I drive on the road, I appreciate every building, every people I see.

I feel like it’s a second chance to live again, to be alive.

What is the first thing you’re going to say to your daughter and wife when you finally get to see them in person? I know you’re quarantining for almost two more weeks now.

Yes. So when I see my daughter and my wife, I definitely will give them big hugs. Try to don’t let them go. I maybe will, like, have my daughter in my arms all the time. I will come home and spend every minute with my family. Appreciate every day, living.

All right. Good night. Have a great night’s sleep. Thanks, James.

Thank you. Thank you for checking in on me.

My pleasure. Bye. Goodbye.

Bye-bye.



We’ll be right back.

Here’s what else you need to know today. In interviews on Sunday, members of the president’s coronavirus task force delivered dire warnings about the pandemic’s projected path in the United States.

No state, no metro area will be spared. And the sooner we react, and the sooner the states and the metro areas react and ensure that they put in full mitigation, at the same time understanding exactly what their hospitals need, then we’ll be able to move forward together and protect the most Americans.

Speaking to NBC News, Dr. Deborah Birx said that the White House was asking every state to prepare for the kind of outbreak now occurring in New York, where there are about 60,000 infections.

Well, Dr. Birx said yesterday, as you know, that she doesn’t think any city will be spared from this virus. How many cases do you think the U.S. will reach?

I mean, looking at what we’re seeing now, you know, I would say between 100 and 200,000 cases — excuse me, deaths. But I just don’t think that we really need to make a projection when it’s such a moving target.

On CNN, Dr. Anthony Fauci said that millions of Americans could eventually be infected, and that between 100,000 and 200,000 could die.

What we do know, Jake, is that we’ve got a serious problem in New York. We have a serious problem in New Orleans. And we’re going to be developing serious problems in other areas.

On Sunday night, the president extended federal guidelines for social distancing to the end of April and backed away from his previous plan to open up much of the country by Easter.

That’s it for “The Daily.” I’m Michael Barbaro. See you tomorrow.

On Friday the health authorities in Santa Clara, which has more than 590 cases and is home to the headquarters of companies like Google and Apple, added a dashboard that charts the number of daily cases and other metrics.

But the county’s public information office says it will not publicly disclose the number of cases in each city because doing so could make individuals more easily identifiable.

In a sign of how contested the question of public disclosure is, disagreement exists even within the Santa Clara County government.

Dr. Jeffrey V. Smith, the county executive, who is both a medical doctor and a lawyer, argues that more precise geographical information about the spread does not help combat the virus because it is already widespread.

“Reporting positive tests with a census tract or a city name provides data that is not helpful,” Dr. Smith said. “In fact, such data has the risk of stigmatizing areas and regions of the country in a way that does not help.”

But David Cortese, a member of the county’s board of supervisors, says that the public has the right to know more and that a patient’s identity is unlikely to be revealed by giving a breakdown of cases by city.

“I think when people can’t get information they freak out, they think something is being hidden from them, conspiracy theories grow, suspicions grow,” he said. “I think it’s always better to be as truthful, calmly, and transparent with the public as you can be.”

As an example, Mr. Cortese says he is alarmed that health officers have not made more information public on the coronavirus-related death of a homeless man in the county. Given the medical vulnerabilities of that population, doctors and advocates of homeless people have called his office demanding to know in which encampment the man lived so that they could advise other homeless people in the area to be more vigilant. The county, which refused to disclose that information, said in a statement that health officials screened 60 members of the “specific community” and tested nine symptomatic individuals for the coronavirus. All nine tests were negative, the county said.

Mr. Cortese says it is obvious to him that more information on the spread of the pandemic should be shared.

“At the height of the information age in Silicon Valley we have stumbled and fallen flat in terms of our ability to use the tools and resources that we have to get necessary information out to the people we serve,” Mr. Cortese said.

Frustration over the dearth of data also extends to epidemiologists trying to understand the dynamics of the spread of the virus.

Joseph Lewnard, a professor of epidemiology at the University of California, Berkeley School of Public Health, says researchers are hamstrung in the United States by the lack of specific data on testing and on the symptoms patients show.

To make up for the lack of public data, researchers are scraping information on cases from news outlets and other media accounts, he said. They are mainly relying on data from South Korea, China and Italy to try to predict the spread of the virus.

“We are right now learning and trying to project what is happening here in the United States almost entirely based on observations from these other countries,” Prof. Lewnard said.

Moritz Kraemer, a scholar at Oxford University who is leading a team of researchers in mapping the global spread of the coronavirus, says China’s data “provided incredible detail,” including a patient’s age, sex, travel history and history of chronic disease, as well as where the case was reported, and the dates of the onset of symptoms, hospitalization and confirmation of infection.

The United States, he said, “has been slow in collecting data in a systematic way.”

Dr. C. Jason Wang, a researcher at Stanford University, who has studied how Taiwan handled the coronavirus outbreak, says some of the measures taken in Taiwan would most likely not be accepted in the United States given privacy concerns. The government, for example, merged the airport immigration database with the national medical database so that doctors could immediately see if a patient had traveled out of the country.

But Dr. Wang says the proactive approach that Taiwan took to the virus, including aggressive tracing of cases, has helped keep the total number of confirmed infections — 283 on Saturday — much lower than experts initially expected. By comparison, the borough of Queens in New York City, with one-tenth the population of Taiwan, has 10,000 cases.

Some of the information being released to the public in Taiwan and Singapore would most likely be uncontroversial in the United States, he said. Taiwanese authorities, for example, have pointed out linkages between anonymized cases, including family clusters, in an effort to warn the public how easily the virus is transmitted within households.

Prof. Caplan of the N.Y.U. School of Medicine says it is paradoxical that the United States is providing less precise information to its citizens on the outbreak than Singapore, which puts limits on the spread of information through internet controls.

“Here we expect to get information so we have our choices and we make our decisions,” he said. “Our notion is information is the oxygen for democracy. Wouldn’t we want to receive more information than them?”

<|endoftext|>

— Corinne Purtill, a Los Angeles-based journalist who covers health, science and technology

[In Her Words is available as a newsletter. Sign up here to get it delivered to your inbox.]

Classroom education around the world has come to a screeching halt. School closures in over 160 countries have separated a staggering 87 percent of the world’s student population from their peers and teachers, according to UNESCO. More than 55.1 million K-12 students in the United States are now out of school.

With buildings closed, families are grappling with how to teach kids at home (and preserve everyone’s sanity).

The approaches to home schooling vary dramatically by school, grade and state. Some schools are having children log in to Zoom sessions for face-to-face online lessons, while others direct families to websites with activities for kids to do on their own.

But all is not equal in home learning.

Not everyone has access to books, school supplies and Wi-Fi, with low-income families especially hard-hit. And public safety nets like libraries, where children might have gone in the past, have closed their doors.

How are families managing home schooling in a pandemic?

Corinne Purtill, a Los Angeles-based journalist and parent of two, and Francesca Donner, an editor and a parent of three, discuss.

Francesca Donner: Before we get started, I just need to say I’m sorry for being nine hours late to this discussion. My day with two kids and a baby was a lot.

Corinne Purtill: Oh, I get it.

FD: And after I finally got the baby to bed, I needed to take a shower and change from one set of pajamas into another. Forget button pants, Corinne. All the best practices we discussed last week about working from home have flown out the window.

CP: Whatever it takes. That is the rule right now: whatever it takes.

FD: True. OK. Today we are going to talk about home schooling. You started home school last week. How’s it going?

CP: Last week was a resounding … meh. Think of what an adjustment it has been for adults to start working from home — fighting off distractions, finding a routine.

For kids, this is huge. Their lives are disrupted, they can’t see their friends, and the adults around them are undeniably stressed. Even if they reacted at first as if summer vacation had come early, a lot of them are also worried about this virus and how it’s changing their life.

FD: And that’s totally valid.

In my family, we’re still technically on “spring break,” but it’ll soon be clear that spring break isn’t so different from “back to school” — and not necessarily in a good way. We were so aimless in the early days that I finally broke down and had my boys, ages 7 and 9, create a schedule. I can’t say they followed it, apart from “11:30 a.m. snack,” but it did help to provide a semblance of routine.

CP: That’s a start! Count that as a win. We all need wins.

FD: It also counted as an activity.

CP: We are in this for the long haul, and everyone is going to need to figure out what keeps their family sane and balanced.

I haven’t made a super detailed color-blocked schedule, mostly because I know my children, ages 9 and 3, will treat it exactly like the organic hand-pureed baby food I made exactly once for each of them as infants: They’ll be visibly appalled and refuse to have anything to do with it.

But I also know my household, and I know that if I let chaos and Netflix rule all day, by late afternoon everyone is tearful and snarly, even the kids.

This week, we are trying a loose schedule of schoolwork in the morning and free play in the afternoon. Will it work? I have no idea. All of life is an experiment right now.

FD: In concept, I like that very much. But does schoolwork in the morning need to be overseen by you or can you leave them to it?

CP: My 9-year-old daughter and I talk the night before about which activities from the school’s suggested list she’ll want to do in each subject area. She’s old enough to be able to tackle most things on her own, and if she has any questions, I’m around. I’m around a lot these days.

At lunchtime I look over what she’s done, mainly just to make sure she’s been doing something on the laptop besides watching people make slime on YouTube. The afternoon is free time.

FD: And what does free time actually entail?

CP: My daughter can do her own thing. Her little brother, who can’t read yet, needs more attention.

He likes to pretend — he’s on a pirate ship, he’s in the wilderness, sometimes both at once — and he’d like me there with him while he does. When I can, I go all in on pretending. When I’ve got work, I juggle: playing cars while listening to a conference call, setting him up with a project before opening my laptop, and when I need to, turning on the TV or handing him my phone without guilt.

Some structure is helpful, but I try not to overplan. My friend Megan Carmichael is a funeral consultant who writes frequently on helping families cope with grief and loss. She’s also the mom of two young kids here in Southern California. I’ve been thinking a lot about something she wrote on Instagram earlier this week: “A lot of that activity planning is our way of avoiding the undercurrent of uncertainty. Life is scary, schedules are comforting. Our kids have a chance to find their own path and to explore this new way of life. This is new to ALL of us and everyone deserves an opportunity to find their own rhythm.”

FD: In other words, we’re trying to put some structure around that which we can’t control.

But you’re right about the freedom of exploration. “Wow in the World” had a great podcast for kids about how the mind becomes way more creative when we’re left to our own devices (i.e. bored).

If the online resources and guides and color-coded Instagram schedules are anything to go by, the home schooling thing is going to be a full-time job. I appreciate the resources, but, well, they’re a lot. (Remember the Israeli mom video? I see you, Shiri. We all do!)

CP: They are a lot. And it’s not a realistic expectation that those of us employed outside the home can continue to do our own jobs, while seamlessly taking on the work of the trained professionals who educated our children up until a few weeks ago. Anyone who thinks that teaching and caregiving aren’t labor-intensive jobs is profoundly undervaluing both.

Updated Dec. 18, 2020

The latest on how the pandemic is reshaping education.

FD: Can we take a moment to recognize the truly extraordinary efforts by teachers and educators to get at-home learning plans in place, however bumpy they may be. It’s new for all of us.

I know that academics in my household are going to slide, even with the resources of parents (me and my husband, generally available), working Wi-Fi (generally pretty good) and books, paper, pencils and a laptop to share.

But I worry far more for kids who don’t have parents at home to handhold them through the twists and turns of learning. It’s not fair. Access to the internet and books at home is such an advantage.

CP: Absolutely. This shutdown will exacerbate the educational gap between kids who have access to the internet, books — even food and a stable home — during this time, and those who don’t. This crisis has shut down all the workarounds strapped families rely on, like school meals and internet access at libraries.

Not every family has a computer, let alone more than one. The Los Angeles Times spoke to a teacher here in Los Angeles who has a student whose only internet access is on her dad’s phone, which she can only see once he gets home from a full day of work. In addition to schooling, many families are also now trying to navigate the byzantine process of applying for unemployment benefits and temporary insurance.

Plus, the instructions from the school can be confusing even if you are a parent fluent in the local language, and virtually impossible to manage if not.

FD: Right. And The New York Times wrote about a fourth-grade honor student who brought home her school’s loaner iPad only to discover there was no internet at her family’s studio apartment in a homeless shelter. It’s heartbreaking.

Some groups are working on it. The nationwide organization ParentChild+ secured an emergency grant to distribute smartphones and tablets with data plans to Massachusetts families in need. In the Bay Area, the same group set up drive-through centers to serve families with supplies like books and diapers, which are placed directly in the trunk of the car.

But the education gap is brutal — it leaves the poor and vulnerable behind.

And parents who have more can spend more to keep their kids learning now, buying them extra books and educational games, and later to get their kids up to speed on whatever they missed — tutoring, ballet classes and so on.

CP: Yep, just as they were doing before the virus.

Anne Helen Petersen at Buzzfeed asked a social worker in Pennsylvania what could be done to help families in such straits right now. I’ve been thinking about her answer ever since:

“I’m not overly interested in what people think they can do today, right now, from the comfort of their homes,” she said. “To me, that’s well-intentioned but shortsighted. People don’t have a lot to offer my clients right now. I want people to start thinking in macro, not micro. I want them to think about the structural inequalities that put my clients at greater risk — economics, education, mental health services, drug and alcohol services — and I want them to care about those when this is over. If you really want to help vulnerable children, spend your time thinking about how you can organize and outreach and demand that from them right now and when this is over.”

Readers: How are your families handling isolation? Are you caring for adult loved ones as well? And how are you caring for yourself? Write to us at inherwords@nytimes.com.

Read more: Figuring Out Work and Family in the Age of Coronavirus

In Her Words is available as a newsletter. Sign up here to get it delivered to your inbox.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — The House planned on Friday to use an extraordinary method to push through a $2 trillion stimulus package to respond to the coronavirus pandemic. Leaders in both parties were aiming to pass the measure by a voice vote — highly unusual for such consequential legislation — so that members who were either sick or in quarantine could be spared a trip to Washington to vote in person.

But the vote could be delayed if even one lawmaker objects and calls for a quorum or a recorded vote. Two lawmakers — Representative Thomas Massie, Republican of Kentucky, and Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, Democrat of New York — have threatened to do so. Lawmakers, and President Trump, fear that Mr. Massie is the one most likely to make good on that threat.

That has generated a great deal of uncertainty on Capitol Hill, sending lawmakers rushing to Washington from all corners of the country in case they are needed to pass the measure. Here’s what’s going on:

There are several types of votes in the House. A voice vote is when the presiding officer asks for members to simply call out “aye” or “nay” in support or opposition of a bill. This is the fastest way to vote. The majority in the House — the Democrats, in this case — typically announces that “the ayes have it,” and the measure passes in an instant.

But before that call is official, any member may interject and call for a recorded vote. That usually prompts a roll call, in which members must be present on the House floor so that they can insert their personalized cards, resembling credit cards, into electronic voting machines in the chamber, and register as “yes,” “no” or “present.”

With lawmakers scattered around the country, leaders had planned a voice vote to spare lawmakers the need to return to Washington.

The Constitution says that in both the House and the Senate, “a majority of each shall constitute a quorum to do business.” In the 435-member House, which currently has five vacancies, 216 now constitutes a quorum. When the House votes by voice, it is presumed that a quorum is present.

But if any lawmaker called for a quorum and fewer than 216 members were present, the speaker would be obligated to count to determine whether, in fact, enough members are present to allow legislative action. If the House fell short of a quorum, Speaker Nancy Pelosi would have to summon members back, putting off a vote until later Friday or Saturday.

If the speaker determined there was, in fact, a quorum, she could overrule the point of order. If the representative insisted on an electronically recorded vote, he or she could ask for the yeas and nays, and hope that one-fifth of the members present rise to indicate their support for the request.

Typically, House floor votes are crowded free-for-alls, where lawmakers swarm in the well of the chamber, chatting and strategizing in scrums. In the era of the coronavirus, which has sickened at least three sitting lawmakers and led dozens more to quarantine, things will look very different.

The sergeant-at-arms and attending physician of the Capitol have issued guidance on voting, and will monitor the number of members in the Capitol and on the floor “to ensure we maintain safe social distancing at all times,” according to a memo sent to lawmakers on Thursday.

In the event of a recorded vote, the memo said, lawmakers would vote in blocks. “Voting will be done alphabetically in groups of 30 members over an extended period of time,” the memo said, “to minimize the risks posed by placing too many individuals in one location.”

No. The legislation, which the Senate passed unanimously on Wednesday, is overwhelmingly supported by Democrats and Republicans, as well as Mr. Trump. An objection on Friday might slow its passage, but it is all but certain to be approved and quickly signed by the president.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — When President Trump signed the $2 trillion economic stabilization package on Friday to respond to the coronavirus pandemic, he undercut a crucial safeguard that Democrats insisted upon as a condition of agreeing to include a $500 billion corporate bailout fund.

In a signing statement released hours after Mr. Trump signed the bill in a televised ceremony in the Oval Office, the president suggested he had the power to decide what information a newly created inspector general intended to monitor the fund could share with Congress.

Under the law, the inspector general, when auditing loans and investments made through the fund, has the power to demand information from the Treasury Department and other executive branch agencies. The law requires reporting to Congress “without delay” if any agency balks and its refusal is unreasonable “in the judgment of the special inspector general.”

Democrats blocked a final agreement on the package this week as they insisted on stronger oversight provisions to ensure that the president and Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin could not abuse the bailout fund. They feared that Mr. Trump, who has previously stonewalled congressional oversight, would do the same when it came to the corporate aid program.

But in his statement, which the White House made public about two hours after the president signed the bill, Mr. Trump suggested that under his own understanding of his constitutional powers as president, he can gag the special inspector general for pandemic recovery, known by the acronym S.I.G.P.R., and keep information from Congress.

“I do not understand, and my administration will not treat, this provision as permitting the S.I.G.P.R. to issue reports to the Congress without the presidential supervision required” by a clause of the Constitution that instructs the president to take care that the laws are faithfully executed, the statement said.

Mr. Trump has a history of trying to keep damaging information acquired by an inspector general from reaching Congress.

The impeachment scandal began with the disclosure that a whistle-blower had filed a report about something that the intelligence community’s inspector general deemed to be an “urgent concern.” A federal law states that the director of national intelligence should send Congress such a complaint within seven days.

But the Trump administration decided it could lawfully withhold that report from lawmakers. It eventually reversed course under political pressure, bringing to light that an intelligence official had raised alarms about Mr. Trump withholding congressionally mandated military assistance to Ukraine to coerce that country’s government into announcing investigations that would give Mr. Trump personal political benefits.

The signing statement also challenged several other provisions in the bill, including one requiring consultation with Congress about who should be the staff leaders of a newly formed executive branch committee charged with conducting oversight of the government’s response to the pandemic.

Citing his understanding of his power to supervise executive branch staff positions, Mr. Trump said he would not interpret that as mandatory although he anticipated that they would be consulted anyway.

Mr. Trump’s legal team is led by Attorney General William P. Barr, who is known for his embrace of a maximalist interpretation of presidential power, including the so-called unitary executive theory. Under that doctrine, laws that bestow independent decision-making authority on subordinate executive branch officials are unconstitutional because the president wields total control over deciding how to exercise executive power over the government.

Presidential signing statements are official documents issued by presidents when they sign new legislation into law. They leave a record of the president’s understanding of the meaning of newly created statutes and essentially instruct the rest of the executive branch to interpret the laws in the same way. Congress has no opportunity to veto them.

The device becomes subject to dispute when presidents use it to mount a constitutional challenge to a new law that imposes some requirement or limitation on their power, essentially nullifying the new limit in the eyes of the executive branch. Often such disputes center on matters for which there is scant likelihood that the matter will come before a court for judicial judgment, giving the executive branch final say as a practical matter.

Signing statements, which are not mentioned in the Constitution, were once rare, but presidents started to issue them more frequently starting in the second term of the Reagan administration.

They became controversial under President George W. Bush, who used them to challenge more provisions of new laws than all previous presidents combined, including asserting a right to authorize officials to bypass laws like a torture ban and oversight provisions of the USA Patriot Act he had agreed to as a condition of breaking a Senate filibuster to get an extension of the law passed when it was about to expire.

The American Bar Association, in 2006 and 2012, urged presidents to stop using signing statements, which it called “contrary to the rule of law and our constitutional system of separation of powers.” It said presidents should veto bills that they deem to be flawed, and give Congress the opportunity to override their judgments or fix the legislation.

But executive branch legal teams in administrations of both parties have maintained that the device is legitimate and useful. Some veterans of Democratic administrations that used signing statements — as Presidents Bill Clinton and Barack Obama did, albeit less aggressively — have argued that it is impractical to veto important bills over minor flaws and that the focus should instead be on the legitimacy of the theories of executive power that presidents invoke as the basis for their challenges.

<|endoftext|>

Like so many other long-haul truckers, pumping wares of a gasping economy through the arteries of the nation’s highway system, Darrell Woolsey sees the changing landscape through his windshield.

Self-isolated in the cab of his 2016 Freightliner, a twin mattress behind him and the world out front, Mr. Woolsey moves from one load to the next, one truck stop to another, a game of dot-to-dot to keep business churning.

In the past two weeks, as the coronavirus spread across the country and forced most everyone into hiding, Mr. Woolsey picked up recycled plastic from Jack Daniel’s in Tennessee and delivered it to Trex, maker of composite decks, in Virginia. He carried massive steel buckets for Bobcat excavators from North Dakota to Georgia. He hauled rolls of brown paper from Alabama to Texas, radiator coils for furnaces and air-conditioners from Virginia to Iowa.

He wonders if the truckload of trees he picked up at a Tennessee nursery and delivered to five Home Depots in Minnesota and North Dakota got sold and planted before the storm of coronavirus hit.

For now, he will keep on trucking, rumbling through these times in a diesel-powered cocoon of glass and steel, a Lhasa apso named Rusty by his side, Clorox wipes on the dash. He and other truckers are bringing the goods so that the rest of us can stay put.

Mr. Woolsey does not know when he will go home to Cheyenne, Wyo., where he has a wife and three children.

“I’m quarantined, even though I’m moving around,” he said. “So I might as well keep working, as long as I can.”

Truckers are already familiar with the type of self-isolation now facing millions of Americans — being confined to small spaces, disconnected from family and friends, unsure what the days ahead will bring. Loneliness is part of the job, even as the world passes by.

Interaction is limited to waves and gestures, some pleasantries with shipping clerks, small talk at the truck stop.

Almost all of a day’s 24 hours, awake and asleep, are spent in the cab. When he is parked, and closes the curtains to the outside world, he is in full quarantine. He calls home. He cooks on his George Foreman grill. He watches DVDs. He posts videos to his YouTube channel. He sleeps on the little mattress.

“I live in something smaller than a jail cell all the time,” Mr. Woolsey said. “I hear other people complaining, and I’m like, get over it. There’s lots of us living like this all the time, coronavirus or not.”

He is not sure how long he can outrun the virus, or its effects on the trucking business. Fewer overseas shipments into the ports mean fewer trucks needed to haul them into the nation’s interior. Slowing production and falling revenues for American companies will trickle into the thinning bloodstream of transportation.

“Trucking is just booming, and we’ve got to move stuff to restock Costco and Walmart and all the grocery stores,” said Todd Amen, chief executive of American Truck Business Services, which provides financial services for drivers. “That’s happening right now,” he said. “It just depends on how long this lasts.”

By at least one gauge, the industry appears to be holding steady. Travel Centers of America, which has more than 260 truck stops in the United States, said that its sales of diesel, which powers most large trucks, had a double-digit spike in early March.

Sales have settled in recent days to “positive low-single digits, year over year,” chief executive Jon Pertchik said. Predicting the next few weeks, he said, is difficult.

“We’re struggling to put any certainty into an uncertain time,” Mr. Pertchik said.

There are more than three million truckers in the United States, according to an industry trade group, the American Trucking Associations, and about 1.8 million of them are classified by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics as operators of heavy trucks or tractor-trailers.

That includes all types, from dry vans making short hauls to tankers carrying liquids. Intermodal truckers carry shipping containers on their backs, from seaports to inland distribution centers. Reefer drivers haul refrigerated products of all kinds.

Mr. Woolsey, 52, is among several hundred thousand truckers who own and operate their own vehicles. He leases his truck and trailer to a company called Turquoise Trucking, based in Iowa. It finds him loads, stays in touch with him through a dispatcher, and gives him 85 percent of the negotiated rate. He pays the expenses, such as fuel and maintenance.

He is also a childhood friend of mine. He worked as a disc jockey for a long time, owned a small radio station in Wyoming, then started over again about a decade ago as a truck driver. He always loved to drive. We had not been in touch for years when he texted last weekend.

“Don’t know if this is still a good number for you,” he wrote, and it turned out he was in Little Rock, waiting to deliver a load of paper, at a time that most of us were sheltered in place.

Truck drivers are on the move, maybe more than workers in any profession. Social distancing is only a problem when you stop and get out of the cab, which might only be a couple of times a day.

“It’s only when I walk past a couple of people to go use a bathroom, or interact with a shipper or receiver,” Mr. Woolsey said. Truckers, at least male truckers, save empty bottles to limit their bathroom stops, he said. Maybe now more than ever.

But if they contract the virus, truckers can spread it over long distances. And truckers represent an at-risk group — mostly older males, typically with more underlying health issues than the general population. They are more than twice as likely to be obese and to smoke, studies suggest. Few have health insurance.

Mr. Woolsey is more concerned about the coronavirus affecting his family, not him, but he has noticed the precautions unspooling across the country.

He first noticed that truck stops had stopped using “rollergrillers,” those self-serve hot-dog cookers, a couple of weeks ago. Their dining rooms began closing to everything but takeout. Fast-food places were limited to drive-through orders, no help to a trucker.

Weigh stations seemed to be waving truckers through without as much personal contact as usual. Shippers and receivers were closing their waiting rooms to truckers, posting signs to ask them to stay in their cabs while goods were loaded and unloaded.

At Super Radiator Coils in Richmond this past week, they asked truckers to take a squirt of hand sanitizer when entering the office.

Even if Mr. Woolsey is the last trucker on the highway, there are federal limits on how far he can go — generally, 11 hours of driving in a 14-hour window each day. Driving time is logged and inspected.

He split the 1,000 miles from Virginia to Iowa into two shifts, pulling over to sleep through an afternoon. Rested, and with his legal clock reset, he drove through the night to deliver coils — “probably the innards to an A.C. unit or something,” he said — at the Lennox factory in Marshalltown, Iowa.

Most of the trips the past two weeks earned him $2 a mile, pretty standard and about double what he needs to cover costs.

But one run last week, a load of flooring headed from Georgia to New Jersey, was canceled at the last minute. The trip to Iowa earned him about $1.29 per mile.

“When that flooring load canceled on me, I thought maybe they just don’t need flooring right now,” he said. “But that low rate this week? I don’t know.”

But Mr. Woolsey is determined to see how the economics play out. His world bends with the elasticity of supply and demand. Maybe shipping will slow. Maybe truckers will park themselves.

He was waiting in Mobile, Ala., last week when another trucker said he was giving up and going back home to wait out the coronavirus.

“If there aren’t that many loads out there, but still a lot of trucks wanting loads, the rates will plummet. And I won’t make much money,” Mr. Woolsey said.

Traffic in American cities has almost disappeared, but he is a master at avoiding traffic anyway. The sensation that the country was shutting down struck him in the dark of rural Tennessee, where all-night gas stations were closed.

“It’s the middle of the night that things feel a little more ‘Mad Maxy,’” he said.

Last we spoke, Mr. Woolsey was somewhere west of Sioux Falls, S.D. He had dropped off a truckload of fertilizer and was arranging three more loads before the weekend.

The curtains were open, the sun was shining, and Rusty was riding shotgun. Not everyone in this country was staying in place.

Niraj Chokshi contributed reporting.

<|endoftext|>

Days after issuing an executive order that broadly defined most businesses as essential during the coronavirus shutdown, Gov. Tate Reeves of Mississippi said on Thursday that it was not meant to interfere with decisions made by local governments.

Governor Reeves signed the order on Tuesday, saying that essential businesses should be allowed to stay open, with some limitations, during the coronavirus shutdown. It offered a broad list of such businesses, including some that were exempt from limits on gatherings of more than 10 people as long as they took into account “reasonable measures,” such as social distancing and sending sick employees home.

After widespread criticism, Governor Reeves said on Thursday that he would issue a supplemental notice saying that the order was intended as “a floor statewide” for local governments to follow.

Some cities and counties in the state had already imposed their own more narrow restrictions regarding which businesses were considered essential, leading to confusion about how the state order would be executed.

On Thursday, Renae Eze, a spokeswoman for the governor, said the executive order was considered a “state managed, locally executed” directive that “sets a statewide standard in terms of social distancing and defining essential businesses to slow the spread and protect public health.”

“This establishes statewide parameters that local leaders on the front lines can build on to make decisions that are in the best interest of their communities,” Ms. Eze said in a statement. She said the supplement to the order would “clarify that no local precautionary measures are overruled by this executive order and ensure that essential businesses remain open.”

At a news conference on Thursday afternoon, Governor Reeves sought to clarify the intent of the original order.

“If any municipality wants to utilize their local emergency power — and a lot of them do, and that’s perfectly fine — if they want to utilize their emergency power to go beyond what the state does, as long as their ordinance does not directly conflict with allowing for what the state order says, then they’re perfectly fine to do so.”

But Governor Reeves also said that the order was written to ensure that no county or municipal order “can keep those essential services from going on.”

The executive order defines essential businesses as those involved in public safety, including emergency medical workers and health care operations and facilities. It also includes laundromats and home and auto repair. Restaurants and bars were also considered essential and could provide dine-in services, but they were not allowed to have more than 10 customers at a time in seating areas or other indoor spaces.

The list included nearly every type of business, including financial and religious institutions, and real estate services. On Twitter, the governor said he rejected “dictatorship models like China” in his approach to the order, which in some cases appeared, in effect, to overturn local orders put into place by local governments.

In Oxford, Miss., Mayor Robyn Tannehill said that the city government was confused about how to carry out the order and merge it with its own resolution on March 22 about how businesses should operate.

Oxford, about an hour south of Memphis, has a population of about 25,000, with a large retirement community. But the local population is infused with an additional 20,000 students attending the University of Mississippi.

“Our first reading of the executive order caused us great concern and confusion, as it appeared it was superseding all of the plans and policies that we had put in place for our community,” she said on Thursday.

One example, she said, was that the executive order appeared to allow restaurants to open their dining rooms to 10 people or fewer. “It seemed to open the door for a lot of businesses we had asked to be curbside only, or to close,” she said.

The order also lacked clear penalties for violators, whereas in Oxford, violators could face a $1,000 fine, she said.

Ms. Tannehill said she spoke with Governor Reeves on Wednesday. “He said his intention was not to open the doors wider, but to get a minimum standard,” she said. “And I think he understood that different communities are going to have to approach this differently.”

Mississippi has reported 485 Covid-19 cases, of which five were fatal, the State’s Department of Health said. The order was signed as neighboring Louisiana was experiencing the fastest growth in new coronavirus cases in the world, with nearly 1,800 reported as of Thursday. Gov. John Bel Edwards of Louisiana said on Tuesday that the current trajectory of case growth in Louisiana was similar to those in Spain and Italy.

Governor Reeves’s order said that, through April 17, Mississippi residents should avoid “social and other nonessential gatherings” of more than 10 people in “close proximity.” “This does not apply to normal operations of locations like airports, medical and health care facilities, retail shopping including grocery and department stores, offices, factories and other manufacturing facilities or any essential business or operation,” it said.

In a news conference on Tuesday, Governor Reeves said that he had been in contact with Vice President Mike Pence and that he planned to follow the lead of “experts” in his executive orders, The Jackson Free Press reported.

President Trump said on Tuesday that he wanted to reopen the country for business by Easter, on April 12, despite warnings from public health experts that the worst effects of the coronavirus were weeks away and that lifting the restrictions now in place would result in unnecessary deaths.

<|endoftext|>

This is the Coronavirus Briefing, an informed guide to the global outbreak. Sign up here to get the briefing by email.

The U.S. now has more coronavirus cases than any other country.

Speaker Nancy Pelosi said she expected the $2 trillion stimulus bill to pass in the House “with strong bipartisan support.”

Stocks rebounding from last week’s slump had their best three-day run since 1933, but unemployment claims set a bleak record.

Get the latest updates here, plus maps and full coverage.

At least 81,578 people in the U.S. are known to have been infected with the coronavirus, including more than 1,000 deaths. That’s more cases than any other country has recorded, according to data gathered by The New York Times.

In New York, which has become the epicenter of the American outbreak, hospitals are beginning to face surges in Covid-19 cases like the ones that overwhelmed health care systems in China, Italy and other countries. More than 5,300 coronavirus patients were hospitalized in the state on Thursday, with hundreds more pouring in every day.

New York City hospitals in particular are under siege — and none more so than Elmhurst Hospital in Queens, which has begun transferring other patients out to clear all its 545 beds for Covid-19 cases.

In a gripping video she made in Elmhurst’s emergency department, where she works, Dr. Colleen Smith says the hospital is straining desperately. Staff members are getting sick. Ventilators and supplies are scarce. So many patients are dying that the hospital had to rent a refrigerated truck to store the bodies.

transcript

[Machine beeping] “The frustrating thing about all of this is it really just feels like it’s too little, too late. Like we knew — we knew it was coming. Today is kind of getting worse and worse. We had to get a refrigerated truck to store the bodies of patients who are dying. We are, right now, scrambling to try to get a few additional ventilators or even CPAP machines. If we could get CPAP machines, we could free up ventilators for patients who need them. You know, we now have these five vents. We probably — unless people die, I suspect we’ll be back to needing to beg for ventilators again in another day or two. There’s a mythical 100 vents out there which we haven’t seen. Leaders in various offices, from the president to the head of Health and Hospitals, saying things like, ‘We’re going to be fine. Everything’s fine.’ And from our perspective, everything is not fine. I don’t have the support that I need, and even just the materials that I need, physically, to take care of my patients. And it’s America, and we’re supposed to be a first-world country. On a regular day, my emergency department’s volume is pretty high. It’s about 200 people a day. Now we’re seeing 400 or more people a day. At first, we were trying to isolate patients with cough and fever and be more careful around them, but we weren’t necessarily being extra careful around all the other patients. And then we started to realize that patients who were coming in with no fever but abdominal pain actually had findings on their X-rays and chest CTs that were consistent with this coronavirus, Covid-19. So someone in a car accident gets brought in and we get a CT scan of them, and their lungs look like they have coronavirus. We were seeing a lot of patients who probably had Covid, but we didn’t realize. Ten residents and also many, many of our nurses and a few of the attending physicians got sick. The anxiety of this situation is really overwhelming. All of the doctors, it’s hard for us to get tested even if we want to, even if we have symptoms. We’re exposed over and over again. We don’t have the protective equipment that we should have. I put on one N95 mask in the morning. I need to have that N95 mask on for every patient I see. I don’t take it off all day. The N95 mask I wore today is also the N95 mask I wore on Friday. We’re always worried that we’ll be out of N95 masks. What’s a little bit scary now is the patients that we’re getting are much sicker. Many of the young people who are getting sick don’t smoke, they’re healthy, they have no co-morbidities. They’re just young, regular people between the ages of 30 and 50 who you would not expect to get this sick. So many people are saying it’s going to be OK, everything’s fine, we have what we need. And if this goes on for a month or two or three or five like it did in China, and we’re already this strained, we don’t have what we need. I don’t really care if I get in trouble for speaking to the media. I want people to know that this is bad. People are dying. We don’t have the tools that we need in the emergency department and in the hospital to take care of them, and — and it’s really hard.”

“The anxiety of this situation is overwhelming,” Dr. Smith says.

Our correspondent Sheri Fink spent a day at Brooklyn Hospital, where 40 percent of the inpatients have the virus and suspected new cases are screened in a tent outside. An emergency-room patient who was coughing so hard he could barely speak turned out to be Dr. Yijiao Fan, 31, a surgical resident with no known risk factors other than being a doctor.

The hospital staff “just take their courage in their hands,” Dr. Sylvie de Souza, the chair of emergency medicine, told Sheri. “They put on their garb and they show up. That’s what they do. Of course they have anxiety, of course they have fear, they’re human. None of us knows where this is taking us.”

The New York Times is providing free access to much of our coronavirus coverage, and our Coronavirus Briefing newsletter — like all of our newsletters — is free. Please consider supporting our journalism with a subscription.

Though India has reported only around 700 coronavirus cases, it has imposed a nationwide stay-home order, shuttering schools, offices, factories, parks, temples and railways for more than a billion people.

The restrictions, which took effect Wednesday, were meant to keep the country — which is very densely populated and has a weak health system — from spiraling into a disaster dwarfing what China, Italy and the U.S. have faced.

But Jeffrey Gettleman, The Times’s New Delhi bureau chief, says that inadequate planning and confusion about the rules have led to chaos after just one day. Police officers attacked pharmacists who tried to go to work, one industry official said. Grocery stores stayed open, but panic buying emptied their shelves. Some states completely sealed their borders.

Jeffrey spoke with our colleague Melina Delkic about what’s happening on the ground in India. (This is a condensed version of their conversation; read more here.)

India’s caseload is still relatively low. What’s the biggest worry when it rises?

The country spends very little on health care per capita. Public hospitals, the number of doctors, the number of beds, equipment they use, it’s all below the standards of most other parts of the world. Some of the best hospitals in the world are really struggling, so just imagine how a hospital that has much fewer resources would respond.

How are people supposed to access essential services?

The gist of it is that you can go to your closest pharmacy or food source, and because India is so densely populated, those places are everywhere. There’s been some confusion, and some pharmacies and food shops were made to shut. Some journalists have gotten beaten up because police officers said they weren’t allowed to travel.

What warning signs are we watching for?

If the disease begins to spread, person to person, from people who had no connection to the outside, then that’s really scary. These [New Delhi] neighborhoods are some of the most densely populated parts of the world — endless blocks of tenement apartments squeezed really close to each other, with narrow lanes between them.

With social distancing and stay-home orders forcing businesses to shut down across the country, a staggering 3.28 million Americans filed for unemployment last week, more than quadruple the previous record set in 1982. And that is probably just the beginning: Economists think this week’s figure could surge to 4.7 million.

We’ve never been here before — not even during the Great Depression, when millions of jobs disappeared more gradually over many months, not all at once.

To ease the sting, the $2 trillion stimulus bill being sped through Congress includes several provisions for expanded unemployment benefits:

Each state sets its own benefit maximums, but wherever you live, the federal package would add an extra $600 a week.

Many people who don’t ordinarily qualify for benefits would now be eligible: the self-employed, including “gig” workers, freelancers and independent contractors; part-time workers; and partially unemployed workers.

You could receive payments for up to 39 weeks — 13 weeks longer than the usual 26-week cutoff in many states.

You may qualify even if you quit your job, if you did it because of the virus — for example, if you were sick or showing symptoms, or if you had to care for a child whose day care center closed.

Louisiana, with about 1,800 cases, may have the fastest-growing outbreak in the world, particularly in New Orleans following Mardi Gras.

The case count in Britain is now over 9,500. At some hospitals, as much as half the staff is out sick.

China said it would close its borders on Saturday night to almost all foreigners, even those with permits to reside in China, after a surge in cases linked to people who returned to China from abroad.

Spain, with more than 56,000 cases and 4,000 deaths, said it was returning thousands of substandard test kits to China, where they were made.

Our colleague Tara Parker-Pope has put together a guide to keeping yourself safe as the virus spreads. The advice covers everything from first preparations to caring for a sick family member. Tara boils it down to four big themes:

Prevent infection. One person can have an exponential impact in spreading the virus — or in tamping it down. Learning to wash your hands and cover your cough properly is essential.

Prepare. You can stock up on food and supplies without contributing to shortages. Just pick up a few extra frozen or long-lasting refrigerated foods and some boxed or canned pantry staples.

Stay home. Many of us will be home for weeks, or even months. It helps to keep your day structured. Don’t neglect fitness — use your former commuting time to exercise.

Recover. Most people who catch the virus will have only mild to moderate symptoms. If you think you might have symptoms, don’t just show up at your doctor’s office — call first.

Experts worry that the virus could ravage the tens of millions of people living around the world in refugee camps, where conditions are cramped and doctors are scarce.

Medicare, which already covers much of what enrollees might need if they contract the virus and become seriously ill, has expanded some services and loosened some rules. If you’re on Medicare, here’s what you can expect.

If you’re stuck at home with little mouths to feed, dietitians want you to know: Yes, it’s OK if they refuse to eat anything other than mac and cheese.

Did this newsletter take a while to reach you? With so many people now doing everything from working to educating to entertaining themselves online, all that traffic is slowing down the internet.

This was supposed to be opening day for Major League Baseball. In its absence, the Times writer Dan Barry dreamed up his perfect game.

Fanatics, a company that makes big-league baseball uniforms, has temporarily converted its factory to produce protective masks and gowns for medical professionals. The first prototypes bear the distinctive pinstripes of the Yankees and the Phillies.

A mother of four in Israel, Shiri Kenigsberg Levi, has risen to internet fame for her rant about online learning, which hit home for many parents doubling as teachers. We caught up with her.

I’m tackling a job I’ve put off for decades: sorting through boxes of photos. Yet, because I have “all the time in the world,” it is a blast and not a “chore.” Another bonus — because my husband and teenager are cooped up, too, they don’t even mind when I walk down the hall, photo in hand, to share (another) story.

— Dayna Kennedy, St. Paul, Minn.

Let us know how you’re dealing with the outbreak. Send us a response here, and we may feature it in an upcoming newsletter.

Sign up here to get the briefing by email.

Melina Delkic, Lara Takenaga and Tom Wright-Piersanti contributed to today’s newsletter.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — President Trump said Saturday night that he would not impose a quarantine on New York, New Jersey and Connecticut to prevent the spread of the coronavirus, but would instead issue a “strong” travel advisory for the region to be enacted by the governors of the three states.

Mr. Trump made the announcement on Twitter just hours after telling reporters that he was considering a quarantine of the area in an effort to limit the spread of the virus to Florida and other parts of the country, a move that would have been a drastic exercise of federal power to further restrict travel by millions of Americans.

Mr. Trump had offered no details about how his administration would enforce a ban on movements in and out of the three northeastern states, including the country’s most populous city, and the idea drew swift condemnation. Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York called it a “declaration of war on states,” and Gov. Ned Lamont of Connecticut said it could cause confusion and panic.

The president appeared to heed those warnings, abruptly abandoning a proposal that he had floated with no notice on Saturday morning, once again subjecting the country — and, in particular, people in the northeast — to mixed messages about what his administration believed was necessary to defeat the dangerous pathogen.

[Thinking of traveling within the US? Here’s where you can go.]

Public health experts warned that even flirting with the idea of a travel ban for one of the most populated parts of the country was likely to backfire, causing residents to flee for fear of being stuck — only to potentially take the virus with them.

In his tweet, Mr. Trump said that he had consulted with the governors and had decided that a quarantine would not be necessary after all.

Later Saturday night, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention issued a formal advisory urging the residents of the three states to “refrain from nonessential domestic travel for 14 days effective immediately.” The advisory, which was posted to the agency’s website and its Twitter account, does not apply to “employees of critical infrastructure industries,” the agency said. That includes trucking, public health professionals, financial services and food supply workers.

The specter of a federal quarantine came after a wave of governors, fearful about the virus spreading further through their states, had ordered people who had traveled from New York to isolate themselves for two weeks after their arrival. Gov. Gina Raimondo of Rhode Island said Friday that state troopers would begin stopping drivers with New York license plates so that National Guard officials could collect contact information, and informed anyone coming from the state that they were subject to a mandatory, 14-day quarantine.

Earlier in the day, Mr. Trump had implied that a quarantine might be necessary to achieve that same goal, though he was quick to insist that such a move would not prevent truckers from making deliveries from outside the area and would not affect trade with the three states “in any way.”

Speaking to reporters before traveling to Norfolk, Va., to see off the Navy’s Comfort ship as it deployed to New York to bolster hospital capacity, Mr. Trump said that New York and the other states had become a “hot spot” and that infected residents had been carrying the pathogen to Florida.

“There is a possibility that sometime today we’ll do a quarantine, short term, two weeks, on New York, probably New Jersey, certain parts of Connecticut,” Mr. Trump, a former New Yorker who now is officially a Florida resident, said on Saturday morning. “They’re having problems down in Florida. A lot of New Yorkers going down, we don’t want that, heavily infected.”

The president’s musing about a quarantine — and his subsequent decision to back away from the idea — was the latest example of how he has lurched from one public message to another as his administration struggles to slow the spread of a deadly pandemic, prevent large-scale deaths and minimize the long-term damage to the nation's economy and the American way of life.

Days earlier, Mr. Trump had repeatedly defied the recommendations of his own public health experts by insisting that he wanted to lift social distancing restrictions so that large parts of the country could return to work, perhaps as early as April 12. But on Saturday, the president veered in the other direction, suggesting that even more stringent restrictions, like a quarantine, might be necessary to slow the spread of the virus.

“I’d rather not do it, but we may need it,” Mr. Trump said of a quarantine before swerving back in the other direction about seven hours later.

The flip-flop from Mr. Trump came as the White House’s two-week national coronavirus guidelines — including recommendations to work from home, avoid discretionary travel and limit gatherings to no more than 10 people — are set to expire on Monday. Mr. Trump has not yet said whether he will extend them.

The suggestion from the president that he might prevent residents of the tristate region from leaving their states surprised top officials.

Mr. Cuomo quickly dismissed the idea, calling it “unworkable” and questioned whether the president had the authority to confine vast numbers of Americans in a particular area.

“I don’t even know what that means,” Mr. Cuomo said during an afternoon briefing in Albany. Asked about the proposal on CNN, Mr. Cuomo said the plan stood at odds with the president’s desire to restart the economy. “You would paralyze the financial sector,” he said, adding that the stock market would “drop like a stone.”

Mr. Cuomo said that he and the president had spoken earlier on Saturday, but added, “I didn’t speak to him about any quarantine.” Gov. Philip D. Murphy of New Jersey also said that he was unfamiliar with what Mr. Trump had suggested. Mr. Lamont said in a statement that he looked forward to discussing the proposal with Mr. Trump “because confusion leads to panic.”

Mr. Trump did not give any reasons for his change of heart, but legal experts had also raised doubts about whether a federal quarantine of such a large region based on public health concerns would be constitutional.

White House officials had provided no specific information about the legal basis for a mass quarantine of millions of people and Mark Meadows, the president’s incoming chief of staff, said only that the administration was “evaluating all the options right now.” But pressed on the matter, officials referred reporters to a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website titled “Legal Authorities for Isolation and Quarantine.”

The site asserts that the commerce clause of the Constitution gives the federal government the power to isolate or quarantine people, and that section 361 of the Public Health Service Act authorizes the secretary of health and human services to “take measures to prevent the entry and spread of communicable diseases from foreign countries into the United States and between states.”

But Leila Barraza, an assistant professor of public health at the University of Arizona, said an attempt by the federal government to restrict travel between states was likely to be challenged in court, especially if the president had not tried less draconian measures first.

“There has to be a compelling interest for imposing interstate travel restrictions, and they have to be the least restrictive possible,” she said.

The purpose of a quarantine would have been to prevent the spread of a deadly pathogen. But medical experts were split on Saturday about whether such an action would help. As of Saturday, the United States had more than 120,000 known cases of the virus, with infected patients in all 50 states and Washington, D.C.

Other countries, including India, have embraced severe lockdowns of their citizens, including limits on travel, in an effort to try to prevent the spread of the virus, something that some public health experts say can still be effective in the United States.

But Dr. Amesh Adalja, an assistant professor at Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, countered that Mr. Trump’s comments on a possible quarantine would provide little benefit, given that much of the region was already under fairly strict stay-at-home measures.

“Just seeing the breaking news alerts on their phones will cause people to leave the city,” Dr. Adalja said. “It could end up creating more flight from New York and more chains of transmission.”

That is what happened in China after the mayor of Wuhan, where the virus first emerged, began speculating about the possibility of closing his city to keep the virus from spreading.

Panicked residents — many of whom were already planning to leave for the Lunar New Year holiday — fled the city. Five million people escaped before air, train, bus and road traffic was finally firmly shut on Jan. 23. Their travel to other parts of the country seeded new outbreaks all over China.

Public health officials around the country have criticized Mr. Trump and his administration for failing to move quickly enough to provide diagnostic testing that may have helped track the spread of the virus earlier. Governors and mayors have pleaded with the president to do more to help them acquire protective gear like masks and ventilators for emergency medical workers, nurses and doctors.

Mr. Trump raised the prospect of a quarantine even as he left the White House for the first time in more than a week to travel to a naval base in Norfolk so that he could trumpet the departure of the Comfort, a 894-foot naval hospital ship, for New York City. Its 1,000 beds would play a “critical role” in freeing up capacity at area hospitals, he said.

“You have the unwavering support of the entire nation, the entire government and the entire American people,” Mr. Trump said.

Reporting was contributed by Charlie Savage from Washington, and Andrew Jacobs, Donald G. McNeil Jr. and Jesse McKinley from New York.

<|endoftext|>

Update: The teenager has been dropped from the list of deaths from Covid-19 in Los Angeles County, Barbara Ferrer, director of the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health, said on Thursday. She said the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention would be completing the investigation of the teenager’s death.

A California teenager whose death was linked to the coronavirus may be one of the youngest victims of the outbreak in the United States.

Los Angeles County Department of Public Health on Tuesday said the death, of a 17-year-old boy from Lancaster, Calif., was from the coronavirus. Hours later, it walked back that statement, saying the death would be further evaluated by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

“The case is complex and there may be an alternate explanation for this fatality,” the health department said in a statement.

If the cause of death is confirmed as the coronavirus, it would be the first known instance of a minor dying from it in the United States. Some states, including New York, which has the most deaths in the country, have not reported the ages of most victims.

Gov. Gavin Newsom said half of the 2,102 people who have tested positive for the virus in California are between the ages of 18 and 49. “It is a reminder to everyone to take this seriously,” he said.

The teenager’s case grew more complicated after it was publicized. Just as the government was showcasing it as an example of why people in California should take the crisis more seriously, health officials were scrambling to get to the bottom of what had happened.

Mayor R. Rex Parris of Lancaster said on Tuesday that the 17-year-old did not have pre-existing health conditions and that he was healthy until he started having acute respiratory problems. He was treated at a hospital that released him without testing for the coronavirus, the mayor said.

“How do you take a kid in for having respiratory problems and you don’t test him?” he said, using a vulgarity. “I am so livid.”

The teenager, whose name has not been released, was then treated at a second hospital, where he died, the mayor said. The positive test results did not come back until after his death, and it was unclear when the test was taken.

The boy’s father, an Uber driver, is also sick, Mr. Parris said.

“I’m really upset right now. I thought this was a disease that affected people my age,” said Mr. Parris, 68. “Now I realize our kids are at risk — that’s something totally different.”

He said that children in Lancaster are now ordered to stay at home, and that if they were found outside, they would be taken back to their homes. “We are enforcing the law in Lancaster,” he said. “I will not lose another child.”

On Tuesday, the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health reported three deaths linked to the coronavirus, including the teenager, bringing the total number of deaths in the area to 11. Officials said that two people between the ages of 50 and 70, one with underlying heath conditions, had also died.

“Each loss we experience in L.A. County is tragic, and we are sending our heartfelt condolences to the families and loved ones who’ve had to endure this tragedy,” Barbara Ferrer, director of the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health, said in a statement. “Covid-19 does not discriminate by age, race or income level.”

Officials said 256 new cases had been reported across Los Angeles County over the last two days, bringing the total number of cases there to 662. In the United States, as of Tuesday night, there have been at least 53,478 cases of coronavirus confirmed by lab tests and 714 deaths, according to a New York Times database.

While the risk of dying is significantly higher in older people, C.D.C. data on nearly 2,500 of the first recorded cases in the United States has shown that younger adults made up a significant portion of coronavirus hospitalizations.

Children are also at risk. In Georgia, a 12-year-old girl who has Covid-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus, was placed on a ventilator this week. Officials at Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta, where she is in stable condition, said the girl remained in isolation.

In a Facebook post, the girl’s cousin Justin Anthony wrote that the girl did not have any underlying health issues and that she had initially received a diagnosis of pneumonia. “For those of you that think that kids can’t get Covid-19 … Think Again!!!”

The girl’s family, through a representative, declined to comment beyond the post, saying, “We are hoping for good news soon and for her to make a healthy recovery.”

Stephen S. Morse, a professor of epidemiology at Columbia University’s Mailman School of Public Health, said there was still not enough data to say what effect the pandemic would have on youth. He said, however, that even in an ordinary flu pandemic, some young, otherwise healthy people get very sick or die.

“Unfortunately, we won’t know if this is that sort of rare tragic event, or a trend, until we have more data,” Dr. Morse said. “This one has been unusual in that it doesn’t seem to hit young people in the way that other flu pandemics have.”

Rick Rojas contributed reporting.

<|endoftext|>

A Texas man, ranting on social media about the congressional response to the coronavirus outbreak, has been charged with making death threats to Speaker Nancy Pelosi and other Democrats, federal prosecutors announced on Thursday.

Gavin Weslee Blake Perry, 27, of Wichita Falls, Texas, wrote on his personal Facebook page on Monday that Ms. Pelosi was part of a satanic cult and that she and other Democrats should be killed, the authorities said.

The posts were still online as of Thursday night.

Prosecutors said that Mr. Perry wrote, “If youre a dem or apart of the establishment in the democrats side I view you as a criminal and a terrorist and I advise everyone to Go SOS and use live rounds.”

The post, which used an abbreviation for “shoot on sight,” included a screenshot of what appeared to be two tweets by Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader. One, by Mr. Schumer himself, was critical of President Trump’s handling of the health emergency. 

The second was written by someone impersonating Mr. Schumer and criticized Mr. Trump for barring travelers from entering the United States from China. 

“Shoot to kill,” Mr. Perry wrote, according to prosecutors. “This is a revolution.”

Mr. Perry was charged with transmitting a threatening communication in interstate commerce and faces up to five years in prison. 

Mr. Perry, who was arrested on Wednesday and remains in custody, did not have a lawyer as of Thursday night, according to court records. He made an initial appearance in United States District Court in Northern Texas on Thursday via videoconference. 

His alleged screed came as Congress and the Trump administration were negotiating a $2 trillion stimulus package to reduce the economic havoc caused by the coronavirus pandemic. The Senate approved the package on Wednesday and it has advanced to the House.

Prosecutors said that Mr. Perry told the law enforcement officers who arrested him that they were violating his First Amendment right to free speech and that their actions were punishable by death.

“The Department of Justice takes the security of our public servants seriously,” Erin Nealy Cox, the United States attorney for Northern Texas, said in a statement. “Americans are entitled to voice their opinions — but we will not allow them to threaten our officials’ physical safety.”

The threats against Ms. Pelosi were posted beneath an article from an anti-abortion website that Mr. Perry shared on Facebook.

“Nancy pelosi is apart of a santanic cult and so are rhe people who work closly with her,” Mr. Perry wrote, according to prosecutors. “Dems of the establishment will be removed at any cost necessary and yes that means by death.”

Ms. Pelosi’s office declined to comment, and Mr. Schumer’s office said it could not immediately comment on Thursday night.

This month, a Connecticut man was arrested on charges that he threatened to kill Representative Adam Schiff of California, the Democrat who was the lead impeachment manager in the House. Several other Democratic lawmakers have faced similar death threats.

Law enforcement officials said a concerned citizen tipped off local police about Mr. Perry’s posts.

“The defendant threatened the life of an elected official and that will not be tolerated,” Matthew J. DeSarno, the F.B.I. special agent in charge in Dallas, said in a statement.













<|endoftext|>

John Lowry vacationed in Door County, Wis., when he was a child. He loved it so much that 30 years ago he moved there. It’s not in his nature to tell people who share his fondness for what he calls “the Cape Cod of the Midwest” to please just stay away.

Mr. Lowry has always supported the rights of property owners, and generally believes in freedom from too much government interference. He once registered as a Republican, but now considers himself “a conservative liberal or a liberal conservative.” He knows Door County’s vacation homeowners pay property taxes and should be able to enjoy their homes. But these are extraordinary times.

On a recent morning, Mr. Lowry, 79, the chairman of the town board in the Door County community of Liberty Grove, sat down and wrote a message unlike any other he’s ever delivered to this community that thrives because of its two million visitors each year.

“If you have a seasonal home in Liberty Grove, please stay at your winter homes at this time,” said the advisory that was posted to the town website.

“It’s difficult to tell somebody to please don’t come,” he wrote. “But under this circumstance, it doesn’t make sense for anybody.”

As the coronavirus quickly spreads across the nation’s urban centers, local leaders in some rural areas — who prize their independent, conservative values that tend toward a live-and-let-live attitude — are taking actions that contradict their ethos in order to keep the virus away.

Like Door County, a peninsula that juts between Green Bay and Lake Michigan, many communities are setting up new rules aimed at sealing off borders to part-time residents, part of a patchwork of regulations about which businesses can remain open and under what circumstances citizens are allowed to be out of their homes.

Fear is driving many of these decisions.

Some officials have anguished over their actions, chiefly because they go against the beliefs of their communities.

In New York’s Catskills region, residents still complain about government moves decades ago to seize land surrounding a key watershed. Yet fearful of the virus’s spread, a handful of rural counties have issued bluntly worded orders for second homeowners to stay away.

“We are a very strong property rights county,” said Shelly Johnson-Bennett, the planning and watershed affairs director for Delaware County, N.Y. “But we’re really trying to get people to understand how dire this is. We don’t want anyone to die.”

Door County officials decided last week to declare a public emergency for the interconnected web of communities that is home to about 27,000 full-time residents scattered across the 80-mile-long peninsula. The county had not yet registered any infections, but the declaration freed up resources in case people started getting sick.

Cars with out-of-state license plates were showing up in the little towns across the county where shops were still boarded up for the winter. Hundreds of vehicles, one county official said.

People started joking about shutting down access to bridges that lead to the northern part of the peninsula. As the days passed, the jokes turned serious with texts and emails sent to officials calling for checkpoints at the county borders to block anyone with out-of-state drivers’ licenses from entering. People were getting scared.

“We are trying to protect our own, if you will,” said David Lienau, chairman of the Door County board of supervisors.

That meant protecting Door County from people like Jennifer Miller LaRiccia who, her whole life, has considered herself one of Door County’s own.

Ms. LaRiccia’s remote, three-bedroom cabin in an unincorporated spot called Whitefish Bay has been in her family since 1926, when her great-grandfather tacked the tamarack logs together himself to craft the rustic two-story structure with a stone fireplace and vaulted ceilings. She spent childhood summers there, taking dips in the chilly lake and walking barefoot along pine cone-lined roads.

She lives in Bay Village, Ohio, a far western suburb of Cleveland, but visits her cabin every year in early May to open it for renters, blocking off two weeks for herself and her family over Memorial Day. She returns in October for alone time.

The cabin’s seclusion in the middle of bushy trees and steps away from an empty stretch of beach has always been part of its allure — but now, in the middle of a global pandemic, it’s more appealing than ever.

Earlier this month, coronavirus had yet to hit Cleveland hard, but Ms. LaRiccia believed it was coming. Her city, with its world-class hospitals, was bound to lure patients seeking care. Families of those patients would get sick. Health care workers would fall ill. Infections would spread. It was just a matter of time.

Ms. LaRiccia wanted to get out. But this past week as she was thinking of fleeing to her vacation home, Mr. Lowry, in Liberty Grove, about a 30-minute drive from Ms. LaRiccia’s cabin, was getting increasingly worried.

Most of Mr. Lowry’s neighbors were taking the outbreak seriously. Schools had closed. Officials had canceled a half marathon to prevent disease spread. Hotels had canceled reservations through at least April. The city of Jacksonport even canceled Maifest, a decades-old event on Memorial Day weekend with an art fair, funnel cakes and kolaches that traditionally kicks off the summer season.

Mr. Lowry felt like he should be doing more. He knew older residents are more at risk of death from the virus, and like him, most of his neighbors are senior citizens. Many people are in Door County, where the median age of residents is 52.

The nearby community of Sister Bay was having an emergency meeting, and Mr. Lowry decided to attend to see if he could glean ideas to come up with better solutions.

What he heard rattled him.

Health officials said the main hospital had capacity for 25 patients and could surge up to only about 50 if needed. Just four intensive care beds were available. Nurses had been beckoned to staff a local hotline that was being inundated with worried callers. The manager of the local Piggly Wiggly, one of a few grocery stores on the tip of the peninsula, talked about difficulties securing five pallets of toilet paper to alleviate a shortage.

“Wow,” Mr. Lowry kept thinking to himself as he listened. “What can we do to protect our residents?”

He thought about his own values, and how foreign it would be to tell people to stay away from their own property. He had voted for President Trump in 2016, the same as the majority of other residents of Door County. The county voted Republican up and down the ballot. He was a homeowner and even owned an art gallery and home accessories store. How did any of that measure against a deadly virus?

His town board was meeting the following night, but Mr. Lowry decided officials needed to take immediate action. He wrote the advisory telling second homeowners to stay away, and notified the ones who had already arrived that they should self-isolate for 14 days.

Other communities followed and the county itself issued a new, strongly worded advisory with similar pleadings. Even the state chimed in, with the governor later in the week telling residents to avoid travel of any kind.

Back in Ohio, Ms. LaRiccia was scrolling through Facebook when the admonitions to stay away from Door County popped up. Commenters were starting to bicker.

She considered the tension that sometimes arose between full-time and seasonal residents. The people who came from Chicago and Milwaukee with their big-city lifestyles. They were young. They sometimes got rowdy. Hoping to separate herself from that crowd, she had always invited full-time resident neighbors each October for poetry readings and chili soup lunches.

Ms. LaRiccia started to get angry about officials telling her she couldn’t visit her own home. She pays her taxes and shops locally when she visits. Her family has been on the peninsula longer than most people who live there now. Vacationers like her have poured millions of dollars into the county’s economy.

“Maybe some of us wanted to get away and come up there,” she said.

But then she thought about the full-time residents. They were scared. And really, does anyone know how best to stop the spread of this pandemic? Ms. LaRiccia decided to stay home.

“It’s the right thing to do for our country and it’s our personal responsibility to do what’s necessary to stop this virus,” she said. “Even if we don’t understand it.”

<|endoftext|>

Welcome to Poll Watch, our weekly look at polling data and survey research on the candidates, voters and issues that will shape the 2020 election.

With the United States now leading the world in confirmed coronavirus cases, Americans finally agree across party lines that the threat can’t be ignored.

More than nine in 10 voters nationwide are concerned about the spread of the virus, according to a Fox News poll released Thursday. And roughly that share of all Americans consider it a major threat to the economy, a Pew poll also released Thursday found.

In both cases, Democrats feel this way almost unanimously, and Republicans overwhelmingly agree. That bipartisan consensus applies to people’s impressions of their state governments, which have received broadly positive marks in various polls.

But as usual, it dries up wherever President Trump is concerned.

As he responds to the pandemic, Mr. Trump has seen a small uptick in his approval rating, which hit record highs in surveys released this week by Gallup (49 percent), Fox (48 percent), Monmouth University (46 percent) and Pew (45 percent).

Still, his approval rating remains stubbornly lodged below 50 percent across the board. That’s a barrier Mr. Trump has not been able to breach in most credible polls throughout his term, with Americans on both sides generally steadfast in their feelings about him.

He gets slightly better ratings for his handling of the coronavirus outbreak than for his job performance over all — but even on this, his approval is stuck around the 50-yard line. Three-quarters of Democratic voters give his response to the crisis negative marks, according to the Fox poll, while 86 percent of Republican voters say the opposite.

During times of international conflict or emergency, it is typical for a national leader’s approval ratings to experience a so-called rally effect. Yet while Mr. Trump has tried to frame himself as a “wartime president” during the pandemic, this catastrophe is different than most. It has not involved a foreign adversary or a single traumatic event, as wartime crises often do.

From the beginning, it has played out as an unfolding sequence of gradual strategic decisions aimed at what the president calls “the invisible enemy.” As a result, the way Mr. Trump is being graded for his response largely accords with how people already felt about his style of governing.

“People had opinions about this president very early in his administration, and they were strongly held opinions,” Alec Tyson, a senior researcher at the Pew Research Center, said in an interview. “It’s unlikely that people are just developing opinions about Trump now.”

To the degree that Mr. Trump is getting a bump in approval, the Pew poll found that it was coming especially from those who consider themselves political independents but lean Republican. His approval rating has leapt nine percentage points with these Americans since January, when the coronavirus was first detected in the United States. (Disapproval of Mr. Trump also softened slightly among Democrats, though to a lesser degree.)

This group could represent a crucial voting bloc for Mr. Trump in the November general election. As partisan Republicans have coalesced around him, he has struggled among some moderate and conservative voters who don’t feel an allegiance to the party. If former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. secures the Democratic nomination, he is certain to make an aggressive play for many of these voters.

In a sign of how prevalent the virus’s effects already are, more than one in 10 voters in the Fox poll said they knew someone who had been infected. And 43 percent said they or someone in their household had lost work because of the virus, including two-fifths of Republican voters.

Many Americans who might not typically pay close attention to politics may now be looking to Mr. Trump and Congress for a solution. Ninety-five percent of voters said they were following virus-related news at least somewhat closely, the Fox poll found. And as Congress pieced together an enormous $2 trillion stimulus package this week, voters’ approval of Congress reached a 10-year high. At just 31 percent, it’s still dismal — but over the past decade that number has more typically lingered in the teens.

The president’s daily news briefings during the crisis have averaged about 8.5 million viewers on cable news channels, on par with the season finale of “The Bachelor.” Those numbers don’t include the millions of people who are watching on broadcast stations and over the internet.

Mr. Trump is typically flanked at these briefings by government doctors and members of his administration, and his confident, freewheeling style may appeal to certain persuadable voters. But if the death toll skyrockets and the economy stays dormant, Mr. Trump’s hesitancy to take certain broad federal actions could expose him to criticism.

In the Fox poll, most voters said the federal government had done a poor or only fair job of responding quickly to the virus. And by a 19-point margin, voters said a stronger government response could have helped to quell the spread of the virus. Fifty-four percent of moderate voters said so.

Sign up here to get our On Politics newsletter delivered to your inbox.

Is there anything you think we’re missing? Anything you want to see more of? We’d love to hear from you. Email us at onpolitics@nytimes.com.

<|endoftext|>

[Read more on the Supreme Court’s decision on President Trump and DACA.]

WASHINGTON — Aldo Martinez, a paramedic in Fort Myers, Fla., is one of about 27,000 young undocumented immigrants known as Dreamers who work in health care, many of them on the front lines in the fight against the coronavirus pandemic.

“It’s an all-hands-on-deck situation that we have going on,” he said on Friday, halfway through a 48-hour shift.

Mr. Martinez, 26, came to the United States from Mexico when he was 12, and he is able to work thanks to a program announced by President Barack Obama in 2012, Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals, or DACA. The Trump administration wants to end the program, and at a Supreme Court argument in November, a majority of the justices seemed inclined to let it.

Mr. Martinez said it would be foolish to take an army of doctors, nurses, pharmacists, technicians, researchers and other health care workers off the battlefield in the middle of a pandemic.

“It’s imperative that the Supreme Court take account of conditions that did not exist back in November,” he said. “It seems nonsensical to invite even more chaos into an already chaotic time.”

The status of health case workers like Mr. Martinez was the subject of an unusual Supreme Court filing on Friday, one that urged the justices to take account of a new reality.

“Termination of DACA during this national emergency would be catastrophic,” the filing said.

Ramis Wadood, a student at Yale Law School who helped prepare the filing, said the contributions made by the program’s recipients are well known.

“It’s always been important, and it’s a point we’ve been driving home since the beginning,” he said. “But this pandemic just brings those interests front and center.”

A prescient supporting brief filed in the case in October by the Association of American Medical Colleges and other groups seemed to anticipate the current crisis. The nation, the brief said, was not prepared “to fill the loss that would result if DACA recipients were excluded from the health care work force.”

“The risk of a pandemic also continues to grow,” the brief said, “since infectious diseases can spread around the globe in a matter of days due to increased urbanization and international travel. These conditions pose a threat to America’s health security — its preparedness for and ability to withstand incidents with public-health consequences.”

“To ensure health security, the country needs a robust health work force,” the brief said. “Rescinding DACA, however, would deprive the public of domestically educated, well-trained, and otherwise qualified health.”

Muneer I. Ahmad, a law professor at Yale who represents the DACA recipients in Friday’s filing, said the basic arguments were not new. Still, he said, “the pandemic casts into sharp relief how catastrophic the termination of DACA would be at this point.”

In the past, President Trump has praised the program’s goals and suggested he wanted to preserve it. “Does anybody really want to throw out good, educated and accomplished young people who have jobs, some serving in the military?” he asked on Twitter in 2017.

But when the Supreme Court heard arguments in November, the president struck a different tone. “Many of the people in DACA, no longer very young, are far from ‘angels,’” he wrote on Twitter. “Some are very tough, hardened criminals.”

In fact, the program has strict requirements. To be eligible, applicants had to show that they had committed no serious crimes, had arrived in the United States before they turned 16 and were no older than 30, had lived in the United States for at least the previous five years, and were in school, had graduated from high school or received a high school equivalency diploma, or were an honorably discharged veteran.

The status lasts for two years and is renewable, but it does not provide a path to citizenship.

The Trump administration, which ordinarily takes a broad view of executive power, said Mr. Obama had acted unlawfully in creating the program. Lower courts rejected that rationale for shutting it down.

The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, in San Francisco, for instance, acknowledged that presidents have broad powers to alter the policies of earlier administrations but said the legal rationale offered by the Trump administration did not withstand scrutiny. The court also questioned “the cruelty and wastefulness of deporting productive young people to countries with which they have no ties.”

When the case was argued in November, Solicitor General Noel J. Francisco, representing the administration, said it was entitled to end the program.

“DACA was always meant to be a temporary stopgap measure that could be rescinded at any time, which is why it was only granted in two-year increments,” he said. “So I don’t think anybody could have reasonably assumed that DACA was going to remain in effect in perpetuity.”

Mr. Martinez, the paramedic, said he and his colleagues faced mounting challenges. “The Fort Myers population is very old,” he said. “They have pre-existing conditions that make them more at risk because of the virus. And we have had to put some of our paramedics and emergency medical technicians into quarantine, so that creates a lack of personnel.”

If the Supreme Court sustains the DACA program, Mr. Martinez said, he hopes to pursue a career as a trauma surgeon. He added that all sort of undocumented immigrants had been bearing a disproportionate share of the burdens of the current crisis.

“We are part of the work force,” he said. “A great amount of us are considered essential — janitors, workers in grocery stores, people like myself, nurses, doctors. All of us are working toward protecting the public. If we are unable to do that, we will have an even harder time trying to deal with this pandemic.”

<|endoftext|>

A New Jersey man was charged with making a terroristic threat after he intentionally coughed near a supermarket employee and told her he had the coronavirus, the authorities said on the same day that the Justice Department warned of similar threats to spread the virus.

The man, George Falcone, 50, of Freehold, N.J., was shopping for groceries at a Wegmans store in Manalapan, N.J., on Sunday evening when a worker asked him to move away from her and a food display because he was too close, the state attorney general, Gurbir S. Grewal, said on Tuesday.

The authorities said that Mr. Falcone leaned in close to the worker to cough and allegedly laughed, telling her that he was infected with the virus. Mr. Falcone later told two other store employees that they were lucky to have jobs, officials said.

Mr. Falcone was charged with making a terroristic threat in the third degree and fourth-degree of obstructing administration of law, Mr. Grewal said. Both charges are considered felonies in New Jersey.

The second charge stemmed from Mr. Falcone’s refusal to provide his name and driver’s license for 40 minutes to a police detective who had been part of a security detail at the supermarket, the authorities said. Mr. Falcone was also charged with harassment, they said. The authorities did not say whether Mr. Falcone actually has the virus.

“These are extremely difficult times in which all of us are called upon to be considerate of each other — not to engage in intimidation and spread fear, as alleged in this case,” Mr. Grewal said in a statement.

Mr. Falcone would face up to seven years in prison and a fine of up to $26,000 if convicted on all charges, the state attorney general said.

A lawyer for Mr. Falcone did not immediately respond to a request for comment on Wednesday. In a Facebook message to Reuters, Mr. Falcone denied making the threat.

On Tuesday, the same day that charges against Mr. Falcone were announced, the deputy U.S. attorney general, Jeffrey A. Rosen, sent a memo to law enforcement heads and federal prosecutors warning them to be on the lookout for threats to spread the coronavirus.

“You may encounter criminal activity ranging from malicious hoaxes to threats targeting specific individuals or the general public, to the purposeful exposure and infection of others with Covid-19,” Mr. Rosen wrote, using the name for the disease caused by the virus.

The memo said that such acts could potentially be prosecuted under federal terrorism laws because the virus was considered a “biological agent.”

Mr. Falcone was not the first person to threaten to spread the virus in New Jersey, where there had been a reported 62 deaths during the outbreak as of Wednesday.

Gov. Philip D. Murphy on Wednesday said that a man in New Providence, N.J., whom he called “another knucklehead,” started to cough at the police and medical personnel during his arrest on a domestic violence charge. The man was also charged with disorderly conduct and harassment, Mr. Murphy said.

On March 12 in Hanover, N.J., local police said a woman, who was arrested on charges of driving under the influence, purposely coughed on an officer and said, “Oh, by the way, I have the coronavirus and so do you now.” Three officers who came in contact with the woman self-quarantined, the police said. The woman, who did not have the coronavirus, was also charged with causing a false public alarm, the authorities said.

Mr. Falcone was charged by summons and was not taken into custody. He waived his first appearance in Monmouth County Court. His next court date has not been set.

Mr. Grewal said there was no tolerance for those who threatened to spread the virus.

“We must do everything we can to deter this type of conduct and any similar conduct that harms others during this emergency,” he said. “Just as we are cracking down on bias offenses and those who use the pandemic to fuel hatred and prejudice, we vow to respond swiftly and strongly whenever someone commits a criminal offense that uses the coronavirus to generate panic or discord.”

Katie Benner contributed reporting.

<|endoftext|>

A hospital with room for nearly 500 beds has been closed for months in the center of Philadelphia, a city bracing for the spread of the coronavirus and a crush of sick patients.

But the facility will remain empty, city officials said, because they cannot accept the owner’s offer: buy the hospital or lease it for almost $1 million a month, including utilities and other costs.

“We don’t have the need to own it nor the resources to buy it. So we are done and we are moving on,” Mayor Jim Kenney told reporters on Thursday during the city’s daily briefing.

The next day, he said that Temple University would let the city use a music and sports venue for free. The city would no longer pursue the closed facility, Hahnemann University Hospital.

The abrupt end of the dispute underscored the frantic search for more hospital beds as cities try to prepare for a crisis that is overwhelming medical facilities in New York, and highlighted the tensions between government officials and businesses in responding to the pandemic. This week, the Trump administration backed away from announcing a $1 billion deal with General Motors and Ventec Life Systems to produce ventilators, after officials said they needed more time to assess the estimated cost.

In Philadelphia, coronavirus infections are quickly rising. On Friday, the city health commissioner, Dr. Thomas Farley, reported 154 new cases, for a total of 637 cases across every ZIP code of the city, and three deaths. “This virus is everywhere in Philadelphia,” he said.

The owner of the hospital, Joel Freedman of Broad Street Healthcare Properties, a real estate company, said he had offered to sell the facility to the city well below market price, or to lease it for $60 a bed a day, far less than what two other hospitals in California agreed to charge to lease their facilities.

“Anyone looking at the apples-to-apples comparison can see that Mr. Freedman not only desired to be helpful to the city of Philadelphia and its leaders, but he was very reasonable,” said Sam Singer, a spokesman for Mr. Freedman, who is based in Los Angeles. “We’re disappointed that they didn’t accept what we offered, but we stand ready to be helpful to the city or the state if they want to reopen discussions.”

Hahnemann Hospital, which once served the city’s poorest patients, closed in September 2019. The hospital had been suffering millions of dollars in losses a month, Mr. Freedman told The Philadelphia Business Journal last June. 

“We relentlessly pursued numerous strategic options to keep Hahnemann in operation, and have been uncompromising in our commitment to our staff, patients and community,” Mr. Freedman said at the time. “We are faced with the heartbreaking reality that Hahnemann cannot continue to lose millions of dollars each month and remain in business.”

The decision to close the hospital last year infuriated local leaders and led Senator Bernie Sanders, the Vermont independent running to be the Democratic nominee for president, to hold a rally outside the hospital. He described the closure as a consequence of greed, and an example of the need for a better health care system.

Mr. Singer said Mr. Freedman had been unfairly maligned throughout the recent dispute, and that his obligations included maintenance, compensating his staff and paying off the loan he took out to buy the property.

“They’ve wrongly been critical of Mr. Freedman,” Mr. Singer said of his detractors. “We understand that emotions are high. We don’t want in any way to hold that against them.”

He added, “Even with those harsh words, our doors, our ears, our minds are still open. We want to help.”

Since last fall, the hospital has sat empty and fallen into disrepair, Mayor Kenney said on Thursday. “It has no beds and would require extensive work to make it usable again,” he said.

Mr. Kenney said the city had offered to lease the hospital for a “nominal” amount and pay for its maintenance and expenses, a deal that would have meant “hundreds of thousands of dollars a month” for Mr. Freedman and made the property more marketable in the future.

“Yet the owner would not agree to our offer,” he said.

Instead, Mr. Freedman wanted the city to pay $400,000 a month in rent in addition to making improvements and paying for other expenses, Mr. Kenney said. “I’ll let others decide whether that’s reasonable or not,” Mr. Kenney said.

Mr. Singer said the city contacted Mr. Freedman around March 11 about leasing the property. “We responded immediately and said, ‘Yes, we would like to help in any manner,’” he said.

Mr. Freedman offered to sell the property below market price or lease it for $27 a bed a day. The city would have to pay an additional $33 a bed a day to cover the costs of utilities and taxes, he said. The full amount came to about $910,000 a month, Mr. Singer said.

“They just decided, ‘We’re not going to pursue Hahnemann,’” he said.

City officials had signaled that negotiations were breaking down earlier this week. On Tuesday, the city’s managing director, Brian Abernathy, told reporters that what Mr. Freedman wanted was “unreasonable.”

“I think he’s looking at this as a business transaction rather than providing an imminent and important aid to the city and our residents,” Mr. Abernathy said.

City Councilor Helen Gym said on Twitter that day that Philadelphia should not let “unconscionable greed to get in the way of saving lives,” and called for acquiring the property through eminent domain. Mr. Kenny said city officials had explored that option but determined it was too time-consuming and would require them to purchase the building at market price.

Mr. Kenney said in a news conference Friday that the city would use the Liacouras Center, a concert and sports venue at Temple University, for additional hospital space. The university will let the center be used for free and the space can fit up to 250 beds, officials said.

<|endoftext|>

CHICAGO — A second wave of coronavirus cases is charting a path far from coastal Washington State, California, New York and New Jersey, and threatening population centers in America’s middle. Emerging hot spots include smaller communities like Greenville, Miss., and Pine Bluff, Ark., and large cities like New Orleans, Milwaukee, Detroit and Chicago.

Local and state leaders find themselves struggling to deal with the deadly onslaught, urgently issuing guidance to residents and sounding the alarm over a dearth of equipment in local clinics and hospitals.

As the threat expands, the orders from state and local officials have sometimes been a chaotic, confusing patchwork. With mixed signals from the federal authorities in Washington, D.C., local leaders have wrestled with complicated medical and economic choices. Mayors and governors in Oklahoma, Massachusetts, South Carolina and Texas have clashed over which restrictions to impose on residents, dispensing contradictory instructions, even as their communities are being ravaged by the virus.

This week, cities and states that had no known cases of coronavirus not long ago have seen the infection’s sudden, intense arrival. In Detroit, more than 850 cases have been identified and at least 15 people have died. In New Orleans, public health workers have identified more than 1,100 cases, including 57 people who have died. Eight deaths and nearly 400 cases have been reported in Milwaukee County, Wis. And in Chicago and its inner-ring suburbs, there have been nearly 2,000 cases, as of Friday morning.

“I look to New York to see what’s going on there, and I think, it’s a cautionary tale for the rest of us,” Mayor Lori Lightfoot of Chicago, a Democrat, said in an interview on Friday, a day when known cases in the United States rose above 100,000. “I look at New York and think, what do we do so that we are as prepared as possible as this begins to ramp up in a city like Chicago?”

A survey of cities conducted by the U.S. Conference of Mayors released on Friday found that despite assurances by the federal government that adequate medical supplies are available, cities say the equipment they need is not reaching them.

Nearly every American city is lacking the most basic supplies. More than 90 percent of the nearly 200 cities that responded to the survey said they did not have a sufficient supply of face masks, and nearly 90 percent lacked an adequate amount of personal protective equipment. Detroit said it needed 18,000 surgical masks. Dayton, Ohio, needed 200,000 N95 masks, 150,000 pairs of gloves and 100,000 digital thermometers.

Many local officials seeing a rise in cases have struggled to put in place robust restrictions that would help slow the spread of the outbreak. In Albany, Ga., a city of 73,000 where there have been 16 deaths and more than 160 confirmed cases of the virus, Mayor Bo Dorough imposed a stay-at-home order, similar to those enacted in New York, Illinois and California. But other than Albany and one nearby county, no other jurisdiction in southwest Georgia has restricted people’s movements or ordered businesses deemed nonessential to close.

“It’s not a natural disaster that’s confined to a certain geographic place,” Mr. Dorough said. “The county lines don’t mean anything to the virus.”

In Mississippi, the state government had largely resisted calls to put in place regulations around the virus. That had led to a jumble of regulations, as mayors in Oxford, Jackson and Tupelo closed bars and restaurants and established shelter orders not much different than the rules in Houston, New Orleans, New York, Boston or San Francisco.

“You can only go so far with leading from below,” said Mayor Chokwe Antar Lumumba of Jackson, the capital, which has more than 31 confirmed infections. “We need the state.”

In Utah, a standoff between Democratic government officials in Salt Lake City and the state’s Republican governor has heightened worries about spread of the coronavirus in the state’s most densely populated region.

Erin Mendenhall, Salt Lake City’s mayor, said in an interview that she had drafted — but not yet issued — an emergency order instructing residents to remain in their homes. The order allows people to shop for groceries, pick up medications and exercise, among other activities.

But Ms. Mendenhall, a Democrat, said she had not invoked the order because Gov. Gary Herbert, a Republican, had not issued a similar statewide order.

“For a city to do it alone, particularly a city that’s the center for regional activities and business, it doesn’t do as much good as it would if we act as a county or region or even as a state,” she said.

Many of the new cases and deaths have been concentrated in the Midwest’s largest cities.

Detroit has seen an explosion of coronavirus cases, with nearly 900 in total — including the city’s police chief, James Craig — and at least 19 deaths. Residents have a hard time comprehending why so many people in their city have become ill, especially because they viewed state and city leaders as having taken aggressive actions early on, said Tonya Allen, the president and chief executive of the Skillman Foundation, a philanthropic organization that focuses on Detroit youth.

“I think we’re all surprised by how fast and hard it’s hitting in Detroit,” she said. “You can imagine why it would hit in some large cities on the coast. But why it’s moving so quickly in Detroit, we have no idea.”

The areas around Cleveland, St. Louis and Kansas City, Mo., have also seen spikes, leading officials to warn that medical facilities could be overwhelmed.

“What we do now will determine if we overrun Ohio’s hospitals and get to a situation where our medical teams are making life-and-death decisions,” the state’s governor, Mike DeWine, said on Thursday. “We don’t want to be in that position. I worry about this every day.”

The race to keep Americans at home has happened at astonishing speed. In just over a week, nearly half the states have issued orders or formal advisories for all residents to stay home, and others have strongly recommended it. As of Friday morning, at least 233 million people — or about seven in 10 Americans — were being told to stay home.

Some governors who initially resisted such a sweeping measure quickly changed their minds. Gov. Chris Sununu of New Hampshire, a Republican, who initially described a stay-at-home order as “not a practical ask,” later put one in place.

In independent-minded Texas, where there is no statewide order, at least 20 million people — from the Rio Grande Valley to sprawling suburbs of Dallas — were under local instructions to stay home.

Clay Jenkins, the Democratic judge of Dallas County, was the first county executive in Texas to shut down bars and restaurants and issue a stay-at-home order. He said he had been watching the outbreaks on the coasts with alarm, particularly in California and New York.

“Those cities are two steps ahead of us, and I say that every day,” he said. “The storm is coming. But there is a level of unhelpful Texas exceptionalism that leads people to believe that somehow their rugged individualism or gut instincts will handle the virus in a better way.”

One of the biggest challenges to managing the virus locally has been mixed messaging from the White House, said Mayor Marty Walsh of Boston, a Democrat. He pointed to President Trump’s statement that he was aiming to have the country up and running again by Easter.

“It’s really dangerous and puts us on a worse track than we’re on today,” he said. “If people get this false sense of security that they can go out in the next couple weeks, we’re not going to see the cases decrease. We’re going to see the deaths spike.”

Reporting was contributed by Mitch Smith from Overland Park, Kan.; John Eligon from Kansas City, Mo.; Michael Wines from Washington; Sarah Mervosh from Canton, Ohio; and Michael Powell and Timothy Williams from New York.

<|endoftext|>

Parents,

We would like to hear from children about their experiences learning from home now that so many schools have closed because of the coronavirus.

If you are a parent or guardian who is willing to have your children take part in this assignment, please have them write a few sentences on the best and worst things about having to take classes at home. Do they like staying home? Do they miss their friends? Do they think mom or dad makes a good substitute teacher?

We realize that some children may not have been given take-home lessons, and others may not have access to computers for virtual learning programs; we would like to hear from them, too.

Your children can type up their responses below. If they write about their experiences on paper, take a photo of it and send it to us. Or ask them to draw a picture that shows us what it’s like.

We want to see what children think in their own words, and will select some of the submissions for publication in The New York Times.

Please share your responses using the form below. A reporter or editor may contact you to hear more. Thank you.

<|endoftext|>

This is the Coronavirus Briefing, an informed guide to the global outbreak. Sign up here to get the briefing by email.

Complaints from some Republicans that the unemployment provisions were too generous held up a Senate vote on the stimulus package.

Closed schools in the U.S. are talking about not reopening until the fall.

France says it has issued 100,000 fines to people who broke social-distancing edicts.

Get the latest updates here, plus maps and full coverage

The deal hammered out overnight in Washington for about $2 trillion in federal aid to help the U.S. ride out the pandemic is expected to pass quickly in both houses of Congress — though there was some last-minute squabbling on Wednesday — and get President Trump’s signature soon after that.

Our colleague Catie Edmondson in Washington has been reporting on what’s included in the package. A few big things stand out:

Direct payments to taxpayers: If you make less than $75,000 a year ($150,000 for couples), you’ll get $1,200 — faster if the I.R.S. has your direct-deposit information, later if they mail you a check. There’s an extra $500 for each dependent child. People who make more get less; over $100,000 a year ($200,000 for couples), and you’ll get nothing.

Expanded unemployment benefits: Larger checks for four months; an extra 13 weeks of eligibility; and assistance for freelancers, “gig” workers (like Uber drivers) and furloughed workers.

Emergency loans for small businesses: Employers who pledge not to lay anyone off can get government loans to help make payroll — and if they keep that promise for the duration of the crisis, they won’t have to repay the loan.

Money to shore up the heath care system: $100 billion for hospitals and health systems, and billions more for testing supplies, protective equipment for health care workers, and construction of more space to house patients.

$500 billion to bail out larger companies: To be doled out at the administration’s discretion, but with immediate reporting of who receives it, an inspector general to watch over the process, and a ban on any of the money going to businesses owned by senior government officials — including the Trump family.

The Times is providing free access to much of our coronavirus coverage, and our Coronavirus Briefing newsletter — like all of our newsletters — is free. Please consider supporting our journalism with a subscription.

It’s one of the most pressing questions: Do people who recover from Covid-19 develop immunity to the virus?

So far, evidence points to a qualified yes.

If that bears out, it will have big implications. Survivors could return to work before the outbreak is over and help reboot the economy; immune doctors and nurses could care for the critically ill without fear. Crucially, the antibodies their bodies produce could speed the search for an effective treatment.

But a lot is still unknown. For instance: Do the antibodies give lifelong immunity — as with polio or measles — or is the protection narrow and likely to fade, as with antibodies for colds and the flu?

(Even if you can get reinfected, it’s likely the symptoms would be milder the second time.)

Another critical question: Do people who get the coronavirus but do not become very sick produce enough antibodies to protect them, at least until a vaccine can be introduced?

The quickest answers lie in blood tests, which can detect the antibodies. These tests have been used in China, Singapore and some other countries, but are not yet widely available. Researchers in New York have an antibody test that they say can be scaled up quickly, but it is not yet approved.

What’s next: The Food and Drug Administration has approved using plasma from Covid-19 survivors to treat some severe cases. Gov. Andrew Cuomo of New York says the state will be the first to test a serum developed from recovered patients.

Jessica Lustig, an editor for The Times in New York, describes in a first-person essay what life with her family has been like since her husband received a diagnosis of Covid-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus.

“It’s as if we are in a time warp, in which we have accelerated at 1½-time speed, while everyone around us remains in the present — already the past to us — and they, blissfully, unconsciously, go about their ordinary lives, experiencing the growing news, the more urgent advisories and directives, as a vast communal experience, sharing posts and memes about cabin fever, about home-schooling, about social distancing, about how hard it all is, while we’re living in our makeshift sick ward, living in what will soon be the present for more and more of them.”

Jessica, who refers to her husband by the initial T, writes about how jarringly her outlook has had to change:

Now we live in a world in which I have planned with his doctor which emergency room we should head to if T suddenly gets worse, a world in which I am suddenly afraid we won’t have enough of the few things tempering the raging fever and soaking sweats and severe aches wracking him — the Advil and Tylenol that the doctors advise us to layer, one after the other, and that I scroll through websites searching for, seeing “out of stock” again and again. We are living inside the news stories of testing, quarantine, shortages and the disease’s progression.

Not long ago, many Americans seemed to be seeing the coronavirus pandemic the way they see so many facets of life — refracted through pure partisanship.

Confused by the terms about coronavirus testing? Let us help:

But the picture has begun to shift, our colleagues at The Upshot write. Political scientists think Republicans’ and Democrats’ feelings about the crisis may soon converge.

Madrid is converting an ice rink into a makeshift morgue, as Spain’s case count nears 48,000. The country has recorded more than 3,400 deaths linked to the coronavirus, second most in the world after Italy.

New York State, with 30,811 confirmed cases, projects that it will need 30,000 ventilators before the crisis is past. It has 4,000 now and 7,000 more on the way, the governor says.

Several U.S. states are ordering anyone who arrives from a hot spot like New York to isolate themselves for 14 days. Alaska said arrivals from anywhere must do so; Hawaii asked tourists to put off visiting for a month.

Prince Charles has the virus. So do 8,076 other people in Britain, as of Wednesday afternoon. He hasn’t seen his mother, Queen Elizabeth II, since March 12, before he would have been infectious, palace officials said.

Don’t go stir crazy: We’ve begun At Home, a place to find recommendations from our reporters and critics on what to read, play, cook and much more.

Raise a glass: For a successful virtual happy hour, host a small group, dress for the occasion and keep the conversation light.

Join an aid network: Some people are creating virtual groups to help their neighbors and coordinate donations.

Remake your home: We’ve gathered tips for how to add an office, make space for kids and tackle the organizing projects on your to-do list.

The Times Editorial Board asked President Trump to call for a nationwide, two-week shelter-in-place order: “A nationwide lockdown is the only tactic left to parry a viral adversary that is constantly on the move, and to buy the time for medical workers to prepare for what comes next.”

After just over a week of being cooped up, many American families face an all-day challenge: fighting cabin fever.

Of course, it could always be worse. In an essay for the Marshall Project, a man incarcerated at the Thumb Correctional Facility in Lapeer, Mich., writes: No, Your Coronavirus Quarantine Is Not Just Like Being in Prison.

Worries about money and virus transmission are prompting many people to stop employing house cleaners, who often are undocumented immigrants with no health insurance or paid sick leave and no access to unemployment benefits.

For women with abusive partners, staying at home brings its own risks. The intensity and frequency of domestic abuse escalated directly after 9/11, Hurricane Sandy and Hurricane Katrina.

New York State said earlier this month that it would start making its own hand sanitizer using prison labor. But inmates say they are just putting an outside vendor’s product into “NYS Clean” bottles, VICE reports.

We’re all collectively grieving right now, the world’s foremost expert on grief told the Harvard Business Review in an interview. But he says there are ways to manage the discomfort — and even find meaning in it.

We’re playing Yahtzee on Zoom! My mom, sister, cousins and aunts all have our own score cards and dice at home, so we can play together remotely. Reviving old memories, and sharing some laughs like we did growing up.

—Leslie Johnson, Crystal, Minn.

Let us know how you’re dealing with the outbreak. Send us a response here, and we may feature it in an upcoming newsletter.

Sign up here to get the briefing by email.

Lara Takenaga and Tom Wright-Piersanti contributed to today’s newsletter.

<|endoftext|>

With April elections rapidly approaching in Wisconsin, local officials were issuing stark warnings about holding in-person voting amid the escalating coronavirus outbreak, saying the state was forcing voters to choose between their health and their constitutional right to vote.

For weeks, both the Democratic governor and Republican lawmakers remained unmoved, pledging to keep the polls open even as other states postponed elections. But on Friday, as the coronavirus cases in the state topped 700, Gov. Tony Evers reversed his position, instead requesting that absentee ballots be sent to every one of the state’s 3.3 million registered voters ahead of its April 7 presidential primary.

The sudden request to print and mail millions of ballots in less than two weeks, a task Republican leaders in the state immediately dismissed as impossible, is the latest example of how the pandemic is roiling democratic institutions as states across the country scramble to protect voters and poll workers.

More than a half-dozen states that were scheduled to hold presidential nominating contests in March and April have postponed them; Pennsylvania became the latest on Friday, pushing its April 28 primary to June 2. Wisconsin, if it holds firm on April 7, is poised to play a major role in the Democratic race, and perhaps a bigger one than before the changes.

It is a state that Senator Bernie Sanders won decisively in the 2016 Democratic primary, and, with 84 delegates up for grabs, one he would need to win again to lend some validity to his remaining in the race this time. A significant victory by former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. would most likely lead to more calls for Mr. Sanders to end his bid and consolidate the party’s support around Mr. Biden.

In Wisconsin, the upheaval from the pandemic has set up a clash between the Democratic governor and Democratic lawmakers on one side — who want to expand voting by mail, drop photo ID requirements for absentee requests, extend deadlines for voters to return ballots and give clerks more time to count them — and the Republican majorities in the Legislature on the other, who are largely intent on moving forward with voting.

Mr. Evers cannot send the ballots on his own; he asked the Legislature to convene and approve a measure to do so. But Scott Fitzgerald, the State Senate majority leader, decried the request as a “fantasy,” and Robin Vos, the speaker of the State Assembly, said Republicans in his chamber were “united as a caucus in rejecting the governor’s request” to mail the ballots.

“Governor Evers just proposed procuring, printing, verifying and mandating the mailing of millions of ballots within 10 days. Even he knows that’s not logistically feasible,” Mr. Fitzgerald said in a statement on Friday. “In pitching this idea, the governor is lying directly to Wisconsinites about this even being remotely possible. Acting like this is doable is a hoax.”

Indeed, it was not clear on Friday, even if the Legislature complied, whether ballots could be mailed to millions of Wisconsin voters before April 7. State officials said they were still preparing for in-person voting at polling places by placing special orders for hand sanitizer and calling for volunteer poll workers.

Asked during a news conference on Friday whether there would be enough time to mail ballots to every voter, Mr. Evers said, “It ain’t gonna be easy, but we’re gonna do it.”

Mr. Evers issued a “safer at home” order earlier in the week that shuttered nonessential businesses and prohibited nonessential travel in the state, further raising questions about how the state would hold in-person voting if its citizens were supposed to stay away from public places.

“We need to recognize the impossible choice that we’re forcing on people, which is your health or the right to vote,” said Mayor Eric Genrich of Green Bay, Wisconsin’s third-largest city, which had sued the state to demand that the election be postponed. Referring to recommendations made by public health officials, he added, “There is no way for us to abide by those guidelines and at the same time administer an in-person election.”

The state is not just holding a presidential primary election on April 7, but also numerous state and local races, including a closely watched State Supreme Court race.

For the past week, local officials, particularly in some of the bigger cities, have said that they simply would not have the staff to run an in-person election because of workers’ concerns about the spread of the coronavirus. In Green Bay, 145 out of 270 poll workers have said they will not be working this election, and 90 percent of poll workers are over 60. In Madison, more than half of the workers said they would not show up. In Milwaukee, there have not been enough workers to open the city’s three early voting locations, leaving in question how it could operate 180 polling places on Election Day.

“I’ve got kids home from college, and I couldn’t, in good conscience, I would not ask them to sit in a room greeting dozens of people right now,” Tom Barrett, the mayor of Milwaukee, said in an interview. “I couldn’t expect citizens to do that either.”

The possibility that the state’s largest cities, which lean Democratic, could be forced to shutter some polling locations and relocate others, while suburban and rural Republican-leaning areas remain less compromised by the virus, has led some to wonder about possible impacts on the State Supreme Court race, one of vital importance to the state parties and often a bellwether of November voter behavior.

As of Friday, more than 760,000 voters had requested absentee ballots in Wisconsin, nearly five times the number requested during the 2018 midterm elections. The surge in requests has taxed already understaffed election clerks’ offices around the state, and has pushed a system that has never topped 10 percent voting by mail to its limit.

Republicans in the state Legislature have pointed to the absentee ballot numbers as evidence that the election can be held safely.

“I think that people are pretty smart in Wisconsin, and you hear the numbers, they’re asking for a lot of absentee ballots,” said Luther Olsen, a Republican state senator from central Wisconsin. “So if you really want to vote and vote absentee, you can do it. I would be real surprised if we have any lines waiting to vote on Election Day.”

Even before Mr. Evers’s announcement, national and state Democrats and voting rights groups had filed lawsuits seeking a delay in the election, and Democratic lawmakers were already pleading with their Republican colleagues to convene a special emergency session to help extend voting by mail.

“It just seems to me we are either sacrificing the health and lives of the community or taking away people’s right to vote,” said Gordon Hintz, the Democratic leader in the State Assembly. “I just don’t believe that we can move forward with an Election Day that puts so many people at risk.”

<|endoftext|>

ATLANTA — Neighbors have shared messages of togetherness, etching them on sidewalks in chalk. Performers have shared their music. Restaurants have shared their food, handing out free meals and giving homeless people a place to dine together, just as long as they stayed six feet apart.

With the possible exception of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks and their aftermath, most Americans have never lived through a moment like this one, with its combination of pervasive health risks, sweeping economic pain and utter uncertainty about the future. The rhythms of everyday life have been obliterated, leaving people stuck in their homes, many of them alone.

There is anxiety. There is loneliness. But there is hope, too.

What might have gotten a passing “like” on Facebook, or maybe even seemed a bit saccharine, before the virus’s spread has now taken on added meaning and emotional heft. Many are searching for evidence that a sense of human connection can transcend physical distance. Or they’re just looking for a distraction. And it looks like they are finding it.

Tyler Perry, the actor, writer and director, surprised shoppers in Georgia and Louisiana by paying for their groceries.

He paid the bills at 44 Kroger stores in and around Atlanta and 29 Winn-Dixies in New Orleans, his hometown. He picked up the tabs during times that the stores were open primarily to older and at-risk shoppers.

“We would like to join our customers in thanking Mr. Perry for his kindness and generosity during this unprecedented pandemic,” said Felix Turner, a spokesman for Kroger in Atlanta.

Applause and cheers have been heard throughout the country for the past couple of weeks, as people have tried to show support for the essential workers on the front lines of the coronavirus outbreak.

In Queen Creek, Ariz., a drone video captured the scene outside a hospital as first responders lined up in emergency vehicles and flashed their lights to thank health care workers during their shift change.

Kyle West, 23, a Cincinnati mailman, recently dropped off notes to people on his route offering to get essential items for anyone in need.

“If you are at risk and need help getting essential items let me know,” he wrote. “I will do what I can to help.” He signed the note “Mailman Kyle.”

Many of the people who live in the over 900 homes on Mr. West’s route make less than $30,000 a year, are older, or have disabilities, ABC’s “Good Morning America” reported.

“I didn’t do it to receive anything myself. I just did it to help my customers,” he told the local Fox affiliate, adding that he had received the most requests for toilet paper.

The Backstreet Boys were among dozens of artists — including Billie Eilish, Alicia Keys, H.E.R., Ellen DeGeneres, Lizzo and Dave Grohl — who performed songs and recorded messages for iHeartRadio’s Living Room Concert for America, which raised nearly $8 million on Sunday evening.

The concert was like a modern version of the old-school telethon, benefiting two organizations: Feeding America, a national network of food banks, and the First Responders Children’s Foundation, which supports the families of emergency medical workers dealing with financial hardship because of the coronavirus.

The five Backstreet members synced up through video from their homes to share “I Want It That Way” over a studio backup track, more than two decades after the song’s original release.

Brian performed from his living room in Atlanta. Nick Carter sung by a pool in Las Vegas. And Kevin Richardson was backed by his two young sons, one on the drums and the other strumming a small guitar, at his home in Los Angeles.

“The most inspirational thing about this situation is watching everyone join forces and lift each other up,” said Elton John, who hosted the video event.

“I’d play a song myself, but I happen to be quarantined in the only house I’ve ever been in without a piano,” he said.

Dr. Sarosh Ashraf Janjua, a cardiologist at a coronavirus quarantine unit in Duluth, Minn., was pulled over by the state patrol on March 21 for speeding. But rather than give her a ticket, a state trooper gave her N95 masks instead, CNN reported.

When Brian Schwartz of the Minnesota State Patrol noticed what looked like two used N95 masks in Dr. Janjua’s purse, he gave her five of his own N95 masks, which are the most effective in protecting medical workers from the virus. (He also gave her a warning about speeding.)

“I burst into tears,” she said on Facebook. “And though it may just have been the cold wind, I think he teared up a little as well, before wishing me well and walking away.”

Unable to visit his mother in a nursing home that is in lockdown in New Middletown, Ohio, Charley Adams took a bucket truck up to her third-floor window to cheer her up.

Bucket trucks are usually used to hoists firefighters, utility workers and construction workers up onto roofs and other high places, not for heart-to-heart conversations.

Mr. Adams told a local news channel that he wanted to respect the home’s rule that barred visitors. But he did not let it deter him.

When his mother spotted him at her window, he said, she had told him, “‘Oh, my awesome kid, what are you doing?’”

Ms. Adams, 80, has been getting extra attention since news of her son’s feat spread. “It’s been really great because all of the phone calls really cheer her up,” he said.

In Atlanta, right at 8 p.m., a mass of people emerged outside in the Midtown section of the city several evenings this week and burst into applause, cheering the efforts of the doctors, nurses and hospital workers toiling for long hours in dangerous conditions at nearby hospitals.

In Southern California, Bill Plaschke, a sports columnist for The Los Angeles Times, called up Vin Scully, the retired longtime Dodgers announcer and a towering figure there, in a hunt for reassuring words. “It’s the life of the world,” Mr. Scully told him. “The ups and downs. This is a down. We’re going to have to realistically accept it at what it is and we’ll get out of it, that’s all there is to it. We will definitely get out of it.”

Messages of hope and resilience have popped up in all kinds of places. Children, and also adults have colored the pavement in their neighborhoods with chalk, leaving verses from poems and feel-good mottos.

In Florida, one woman drew a smiling sun and wrote, “Always look on the bright side of life.” In Ohio, children wrote, “stay safe” and “wash your hands.”

And in Manhattan, a poster was tied to a wrought-iron fence in Riverside Park. It was decorated with marker-drawn rainbows and flowers, as well as a poem:

Spring, spring, a wonderful thing

the rain, the sun and the flowers

We will miss you this year, because we’re inside

all quarantined for hours

In a feat of teleconferencing and video editing, a group of students from Berklee College of Music in Boston — singers, drummers, trombone and trumpet players — created what they called a virtual orchestra and performed the song, “What the World Needs Now Is Love.”

“Just a little something to brighten your day,” one of the students who organized the performance wrote on YouTube.

Los Tres Tristes Tigres, a musical group whose name translates to the Three Sad Tigers, wrote a corrido about the situation gripping the world.

A corrido is a ballad rooted in rural and working-class Mexico that unfurls a narrative, often about daily life, hardship and major issues in the news. And indeed, the coronavirus pandemic offered a prime subject.

This one touched on panic, toilet paper hoarding and closing Disneyland — and included a request: Please wash your hands well.

On Twitter, the actor John Krasinski asked his followers to help him find a respite from the chaos. “Send me the stories that have made you feel good this week,” he wrote, “or the things that just made you smile!”

A woman named April Danz replied, saying her daughter, Coco, had just finished chemo treatments. She included a video showing the delight on Coco’s face as she made her way up a street lined with cars decorated with balloons and posters, and a crowd — safely separated, of course — cheering her on her way home.

“Well this is one of the greatest things I’ve seen,” Mr. Krasinski wrote back.

Looking back at it now, Robert E. Kelly seems like a messenger from the future, warning of the perils that can accompany being a parent working from home.

Dr. Kelly, a professor of political science, gained a measure of global fame in 2017 after what was supposed to be a talking-head television appearance discussing South Korean politics exploded into a brilliant comedy of errors. (His children burst into the room and put on quite a show.)

Dr. Kelly, who quickly became known as “BBC Dad,” appeared on the BBC again recently, this time having his children with him intentionally. He and his wife were discussing their experiences dealing with measures in South Korea to handle the virus outbreak.

The children, a girl and boy, had grown since their earlier appearance, but they were still rambunctious.

“Sorry for my kids,” he told the interviewer, as his daughter latched onto him.

“They’re climbing the walls,” he added. “It’s just really, really tough.”

In the United States, one way of coping has been with so-called rainbow hunts. A number of neighborhoods have been decorated with rainbows — in windows and on doors, in a variety of sizes — so that children can go out to search for them and burn some energy.

The network of Little Free Libraries, small wooden cabinets that allow people to donate or take books, started blossoming around the country about a decade ago. The organization behind it recently opened its 100,000th library in Houston.

But in the past few weeks, some of them have been transformed, with books replaced or augmented with canned goods, toilet paper, cleaning supplies and yarn and needles.

The libraries are a modest gesture meant to encourage a sense of community, usually through books, but they are evolving to meet the needs of the moment.

“They want to share, they want to help,” Greig Metzger, the executive director of Little Free Library, said of the stewards tending to individual libraries. “It’s a tangible and physical representation of people wanting to still be engaged and connected with community — and a physical demonstration of our better side, which is to help each other as best we can.”

Not everything has to be heartwarming. Sometimes, ingenious will do.

Joseph Herscher creates what he describes as “comical chain-reaction machines,” also known as Rube Goldberg machines. A video showing one of them has gained fresh attention on social media.

In Jefferson County, Colo., just outside of Denver, music teachers from a local school district put together a performance for their students, which was shared on social media. They wanted students to know they “can’t wait to make music together again.”

They also Rickrolled them.

In internet terms, it is an absolutely ancient meme, well over a decade old, in which unsuspecting people are misdirected to the video for “Never Gonna Give You Up,” a 1987 song by Rick Astley.

On a completely unrelated matter, here’s something else important you should read.

Reporting was contributed by Tim Arango and Jennifer Medina from Los Angeles, Mike Baker from Seattle, Jack Healy from Denver, Frances Robles from Key West, Fla., Simon Romero from Albuquerque, and Sandra E. Garcia, Amy Harmon, Adeel Hassan, Shreeya Sinha and Pierre-Antoine Louis from New York.

<|endoftext|>

This is the Coronavirus Briefing, an informed guide to the global outbreak. Sign up here to get the briefing by email.

President Trump signed the $2 trillion economic stimulus bill into law.

Officials in nearly 200 U.S. cities reported a dire need for emergency equipment.

Prime Minister Boris Johnson of Britain has contracted the virus. He’s the first Western leader known to have tested positive.

Get the latest updates here, plus maps and full coverage.

After erupting on the East and West Coasts, the coronavirus outbreak has made its way inland, threatening to overwhelm parts of the United States where medical equipment is in short supply and official guidance is sometimes contradictory.

In Louisiana, which may have the fastest-growing outbreak in the world, New Orleans is the epicenter. The city’s case count topped 1,100 on Friday, as speculation mounted among medical experts that last month’s Mardi Gras festivities had helped fuel the rapid growth.

Across the country, many cities and states with zero cases last month now face looming explosions: Chicago and its suburbs have nearly 2,000 cases; Detroit has identified over 1,000; and Milwaukee County, Wis., has reported 468.

Counties and cities outside of major urban centers have also seen striking numbers, as in Albany, Ga., whose population of 73,000 has been hit with more than 160 confirmed cases and 16 deaths.

Clashes between state and local leaders over how to respond, and mixed signals from the federal government, have complicated the situation. In states without formal restrictions, one mayor’s order to keep residents at home can be undermined by surrounding cities and counties without such measures.

The chaos of the responses could exacerbate another pressing issue: a severe, widespread shortage of medical supplies. In one survey, nearly 200 American cities, large and small, reported lacking face masks, testing kits, ventilators and other equipment needed to handle the crisis.

The Times is providing free access to much of our coronavirus coverage, and our Coronavirus Briefing newsletter — like all of our newsletters — is free. Please consider supporting our journalism with a subscription.

By now, you may be used to reading a constant stream of bad news. But here’s a reason to be cautiously optimistic: There are signs that strong isolation and intervention measures have slowed the spread of the virus in an early U.S. hot spot.

After cases started to grow in New Rochelle, N.Y., earlier this month, a one-mile-radius containment zone was put in place, the National Guard was called in, and widespread testing was adopted. Health investigators tracked down people potentially infected by a lawyer thought to have been the source of the spread.

Over the last four days, New Rochelle reported just 38 new cases to the county. State and local health officials cautioned that it was too early to declare victory, but it’s a significant drop — early on, the city saw more than 20 new cases a day.

“In the beginning, it felt like house arrest,” said one resident whose family was placed into quarantine. “But the punishment turned out to be a blessing in disguise. This is really a case of perspective.”

Looking for more good news? Craft distilleries are making hand sanitizer, for free. Doctors are finding creative ways to cope with shortages. Research on a vaccine is moving at breakneck speed. We rounded up bright spots amid the coronavirus crisis.

Bergamo, Italy, is the bleak heart of the world’s deadliest coronavirus outbreak.

Once known as a quiet and wealthy province, Bergamo is now a place where Red Cross workers go door to door to carry away the afflicted, where the coffins are so numerous the army has been called to take them away.

Our correspondent Jason Horowitz and the photographer Fabio Bucciarelli have been reporting on the tragedy unfolding there. This photo essay is a look at the human toll the virus has taken.

Around the world, the pandemic is radically altering approaches to love, dating and sex. A meme circulating on social media sums it up: “Can I see myself quarantined with him? Does he come with toilet paper?”

Lockdowns mean new togetherness for some but increased friction and conflict for others. Stuck indoors, millions of singles are turning to the internet for virtual yoga dates, digital drag queen karaoke nights and WhatsApp birthday parties.

The crisis has spawned a new lexicon, too. In nine months, we may see the first coronababies born. In a little more than a decade, they’ll be known as the quaranteens. Sadly, couples who can’t cope with the pressure of isolation could end up in covidivorce.

A Navy hospital ship is scheduled to arrive in New York City on Monday, and the Javits Center, a mammoth convention hall in Manhattan, has been converted into an emergency hospital. There are more than 25,000 cases in the city.

Japan, with 2,083 confirmed cases, seemed to do the impossible — contain the virus without imposing draconian measures. But evidence is now emerging of rampant infection.

France has extended its lockdown by two weeks. The country reported 29,155 cases and 1,696 deaths on Thursday, and its health care system, which ranks among the best in the world, is creaking and straining.

South Africa began a three-week lockdown on Friday after the number of cases soared to more than 1,000, placing the country at the center of Africa’s pandemic.

Take care of your lungs: If you are breathing polluted air, you may be at greater risk of catching the coronavirus and of having a severe infection. Here are some tips on improving indoor air quality.

Reinvent holidays: Many people are finding creative ways to celebrate — cooking Easter brunch for two, staging virtual seders, breaking Ramadan fasts at home and enjoying Nowruz feasts at a six-foot distance.

Have better video meetings: Testing your tech setup and establishing a clear agenda can make your virtual calls with colleagues more productive — and less awkward. And follow these tips for looking your best on a webcam.

Try a new game: Our crossword columnist suggests five tried and true classics that will entertain both kids and adults.

President Trump invoked the Defense Production Act, a power dating back to the Korean War, to compel General Motors to manufacture ventilators. Shortly after, the company announced that the machines would be “scheduled to ship as soon as next month.”

The virus can afflict rich and poor alike, but in the U.S., the response to the outbreak is laying bare class divides, with the rich holed up in vacation properties, the middle class marooned at home with restless children and the working class on the front lines.

Millions of Americans will soon get a direct payment from the federal government as part of the stimulus package. If you don’t need the money, here are some ideas to help you give it to someone who does.

The Supreme Court was urged in a filing to preserve DACA, the program protecting young undocumented immigrants known as Dreamers. About 27,000 of them work in health care, many on the front lines in the fight against the pandemic.

The Oregon Shakespeare Festival, one of the oldest and largest nonprofit U.S. theaters, is laying off 80 percent of its employees, canceling half of this year’s productions and postponing live performances until after Labor Day.

When they gave birth at the same New York hospital, two mothers didn’t know they had the coronavirus. Both deteriorated soon after and wound up in intensive care.

Dr. Anthony Fauci, an adviser to Mr. Trump on the coronavirus, has a new claim to fame: Doughnuts adorned with his image have become a top seller at a shop in Rochester, N.Y., the Democrat & Chronicle reports.

I’ve been cleaning out drawers and finding emails and addresses of friends I haven’t contacted for years. I’ve sent notes in the hopes of reconnecting with friends from the past. I also sent my grown children notes letting them know how much I care about them. I’m in the process of setting up a time to chat online with a former colleague and friend I haven’t seen for nine years!

— Jill Davis, Brookfield, Wis.

Let us know how you’re dealing with the outbreak. Send us a response here, and we may feature it in an upcoming newsletter.

Sign up here to get the briefing by email.

Tom Wright-Piersanti contributed to today’s newsletter.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — After providing nearly $26 billion in aid to farmers over the past few years to offset losses from President Trump’s trade war with China, the administration now has another giant new pot of money to pass out to them with little or no oversight, courtesy of the $2 trillion coronavirus stimulus package.

The legislation, given final passage by the House on Friday and quickly signed into law by Mr. Trump, allocates as much as $23.5 billion in assistance for farmers and gives broad leeway to Agriculture Secretary Sonny Perdue to direct it where he sees fit.

The money was inserted into the bill by senators from farm states after an intense lobbying push by major corporate farming groups. Parts of the industry are suffering immediate hits from the coronavirus outbreak, such as corn growers who have seen prices for ethanol plummet and mom-and-pop suppliers of farm markets that have closed in many cities.

But unlike industries such as airlines, hotels and automakers, which have largely or completely shut down, most farms are still operating. And sales of some products in the industry have surged as worried consumers stock up, generating shortages of meat, chicken, eggs and flour.

The law provides Mr. Perdue with $9.5 billion to support farmers, including livestock producers, suppliers of farm markets and producers of specialty crops, and $14 billion in borrowing authority to replenish the fund he used to make trade-related payments to farmers in the past two years. The department’s entire discretionary budget request for next year is about $23 billion.

The Agriculture Department will also receive an additional $25.1 billion for food aid programs for poor families from the stimulus bill.

“We are effectively subsiding every other sector of the economy” in the $2 trillion stimulus package, said Joshua Sewell, a farming industry analyst at Taxpayers for Common Sense, which advocates less government spending. “So I guess the argument goes that agriculture wants its piece of the pie, too.”

The administration’s use of the money will become a major political factor in rural America in the middle of an election year in which Midwestern states could be pivotal, said Lawrence R. Jacobs, the director of the Center for the Study of Politics and Governance at University of Minnesota. He predicted that Mr. Trump would soon be trumpeting it as part of his re-election campaign.

“This is just an extraordinary and unprecedented opportunity in the modern era for a president to dole out cash,” he said. “In urban areas, they call this walking around money, which a politician hands out to secure support.”

A small army of groups mounted the fast-moving campaign for aid, including the politically powerful American Farm Bureau Federation and the National Cattlemen’s Beef Association. Joining them were other smaller players representing producers of goods like turkey, pork and potatoes or sunflowers, sorghum, peanuts and eggs.

Among their targets were farm-state lawmakers like Senators John Hoeven of North Dakota, who pressed for $50 billion in aid for agriculture. Others included Senators Pat Roberts of Kansas, John Thune of South Dakota and Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader. All are Republicans who serve on the Senate agriculture committee or the appropriations subcommittee that oversees farm aid.

Senator Debbie Stabenow of Michigan, the ranking Democrat on the agriculture committee, was also lobbied.

“We want to make sure that farmers, ranchers and rural Americans are also recognized as needing assistance,” said Dale Moore, the executive vice president of the American Farm Bureau and a former chief of staff at the Agriculture Department.

Farmers in Midwestern states like Iowa, Illinois and Minnesota — as well as in Texas and Kansas — reaped much of the $26 billion spent in the past two years to blunt the economic effect of the administration’s trade policies, according to Joseph W. Glauber of the International Food Policy Research Institute.

Without those payments, net farm income last year would have dropped about 5 percent, he estimated. Instead, it rose nearly 12 percent.

Seth Meyer, an agricultural economist with the University of Missouri, said the economic blow to agriculture from the virus could be harder to offset than the lost sales from trade policy.

“If you are producing flowers and there is no wedding this summer, if you were a fruit and vegetable grower selling through a restaurant wholesaler, what do you do now?” he asked. “What if you are a milk producer selling your product to a processor who has trouble organizing transportation and labor?”

The bottom line, he said, could be a bigger effect on farmers than that created by the trade friction with China — “much bigger, potentially.”

Still, some parts of the industry are seeing benefits from the pandemic. Some big meat producers, including Tyson Foods, announced special bonuses this week for farmers to reward them for the increase in work to keep supermarket shelves stocked.

In general, farmers have weathered recessions better than other economic groups, because while consumers cut purchases of goods like clothing and change their eating habits to save money, they always need food. This downturn is fundamentally different from others in many ways, but Wall Street analysts are issuing bullish predictions for parts of the agriculture industry based on the surge in demand for products like beef and chicken.

“Meat is flying off the shelves” wrote Ken Goldman, an analyst at JPMorgan, who upgraded the stocks of Tyson and Sanderson Farms, two major chicken and meat producers. “We now believe that outstanding retail demand for meat is more than offsetting soft demand at food service.”

Prices being paid to farmers raising cattle and other animals have dropped in recent weeks, reflecting declines in financial markets worldwide and disruptions in supply chains, although these prices recovered somewhat this week.

Major meatpackers are drawing scrutiny as demand rises, amid some suspicion that they are gaming the system to push up their own profits at the expense of farmers and consumers.

“If packers are illegally manipulating markets during crisis we need USDA & DOJ & CFTC to investigate + help farmers,” Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, wrote on Twitter on Friday, referring to the Department of Justice and the Commodities Futures Trading Commission, the federal agency that regulates markets where these goods are bought and sold.

Congress imposed almost no limit on how Mr. Perdue spends the money, suggesting only that the $9.5 billion chunk be used to support a wide range of agricultural producers. The legislation set aside $750,000 for the agency’s inspector general for “conducting audits and investigations of projects and activities carried out with funds.”

Similarly, with the $14 billion for the Commodity Credit Corporation, there is very little guidance on how that money can be spent other than it be used for an “emergency requirement.”

With the streets empty, cars parked and demand for fuel depressed, corn growers are among the most likely recipients. Mr. Meyer of the University of Missouri said about 40 percent of corn production goes into the ethanol industry, where “you are starting to hear of people shutting down.”

Historically, the Commodity Credit Corporation only made payments to wheat, corn, soybean and livestock farmers during unexpected drops in crop prices because of surpluses or declines in output related to weather or disease.

But the administration has used this program to reimburse farmers for billions in dollars in losses after China stopped buying soybeans and other crops to punish the United States for tariffs Mr. Trump imposed on Chinese products.

Mr. Perdue has repeatedly warned farmers not to count on continuing to receive payments from that federal program. But every time funding has been about to run out, Mr. Trump has clamored to spend more.

In late February, after the administration reached a new trade agreement with China, for instance, Mr. Perdue said, “I am not advising any farmer to expect any market program at this point, as the market should adjust for the current trade expectations.”

The very next day, Mr. Trump tweeted that if farmers needed more aid while waiting for the terms of new trade deals to kick in, “that aid will be provided by the federal government.”

Although the Agriculture Department is not obligated to use its new spending authority, industry analysts fully expect it will, especially with Election Day a little over seven months away.

Brent Gloy, a corn, wheat and soybean farmer and agricultural economist from Nebraska, said, “Those checks are going to go out.”

Kitty Bennett contributed research.

<|endoftext|>

A man suspected of planning to attack a Missouri hospital was killed during a shootout with F.B.I. agents, the authorities said on Wednesday.

The deadly encounter took place on Tuesday afternoon in suburban Belton, Mo., after agents on a tactical team tried to arrest the man as part of a domestic terrorism investigation.

It was not clear whether the man was killed by F.B.I. agents or died by suicide. He was taken to a hospital, where he was pronounced dead. Officials identified the man as Timothy R. Wilson, 36.

According to officials, Mr. Wilson had expressed racist and anti-government sentiments. He had been under F.B.I. scrutiny since September, and the authorities said that at one point he had considered attacking multiple targets, including a school with a large number of black students, as well as a mosque and a synagogue.

“Wilson considered various targets and ultimately settled on an area hospital in an attempt to harm many people, targeting a facility that is providing critical medical care in today’s environment,” the F.B.I. said in a statement.

Last week, Belton’s mayor issued a stay-at-home order for its residents. Authorities said Mr. Wilson said he felt compelled to act because of the mayor’s order and intended to use a car bomb to cause mass casualties at the hospital.

The F.B.I. is reviewing the shooting, as is standard anytime agents are involved in shootings.

As of Wednesday afternoon, there were eight known cases of the coronavirus in suburban areas of Cass County, Mo., which includes Belton. The Belton police have also had to issue a statement about false information on social media.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — As Senator Chuck Schumer walked the two miles from his apartment to the Capitol early Sunday morning, getting his steps in since the Senate gym had been shut down to stem the spread of the novel coronavirus, he knew he and his fellow Democrats had a momentous decision to make.

After 48 hours of intense bipartisan negotiations over a huge economic stabilization plan to respond to the pandemic, Republicans were insisting on a vote later that day to advance the package. Mr. Schumer, the Democratic leader, suspected Republicans would present Democrats with an unacceptable, take-it-or-leave it proposition and then dare them to stand in the way of a nearly $2 trillion measure everyone knew was desperately needed. As soon as he arrived at the Capitol, the choice was clear: Democrats would have to leave it.

During an 8:45 a.m. conference call with staff, Mr. Schumer, of New York, was startled to learn that Republicans had boosted to $500 billion the size of a bailout fund for distressed businesses, but failed to meet Democrats’ request to devote $150 billion to a “Marshall Plan” for hospitals on the front lines of the virus.

What was worse, the corporate aid came with little accountability over dollars to be doled out unsupervised by the Treasury Department — a red flag to Democrats after the 2008 Wall Street bailout, and one that would be particularly hard to accept given President Trump’s disdain for congressional oversight.

Mr. Schumer told his staff that the proposal was a nonstarter, and he directed them to quickly spread the word that Democrats would oppose the bill as it was, according to several people involved in the discussions who, like more than dozen lawmakers and senior officials interviewed for this story, spoke on the condition of anonymity to describe the roller coaster negotiations that led to the passage of the largest stimulus measure in modern American history.

Then he called his colleagues — including Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, a former presidential candidate who is influential on the left — to alert them to what he saw as a Republican ploy to muscle through a corporate giveaway. Within hours, Ms. Warren declared on Twitter that she would oppose the “giant slush fund” and urged other Democrats to join her. On a conference call later that day, Senator Patty Murray of Washington, not known for a temper, said she would be “a damn no” on the bill and urged her colleagues to do the same, which they did unanimously in a vote that sent futures markets plummeting.

It was a shocking and politically perilous decision in the middle of a paralyzing national crisis, a moment when lawmakers are traditionally expected to put aside differences for the good of the country, or face a political backlash.

The move was particularly infuriating for Republicans who had been willing to momentarily abandon their small-government zeal and agree to large additions to safety-net programs, including direct payments to Americans and a substantial increase in jobless aid, in the interest of sealing a quick deal with Democrats. Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader, would later call it a “stupid vote,” but Democrats said it proved crucial.

“It showed McConnell that he was going to have to deal with us,” Mr. Schumer said.

The moment was a turning point for the rapid and fitful negotiations over the stimulus measure, which came together over a handful of frenzied days on Capitol Hill, as global markets convulsed with worry and lawmakers scrambled to agree before Covid-19 could infect their ranks and cripple Congress.

After days of intrigue, gamesmanship and partisan assaults, the Senate finally came together late Wednesday after nearly coming apart. As midnight was about to toll, lawmakers approved in an extraordinary 96-to-0 vote a $2 trillion package intended to get the nation through the crippling economic and health disruptions being inflicted on the world by the coronavirus.

The House is expected to approve it by voice vote on Friday, avoiding the need to force hundreds of lawmakers to jeopardize their own health and travel from homes around the county as tens of millions of Americans are required to shelter in place.

The bill came together despite a toxic dynamic between the two parties in the normally courtly Senate, where Mr. McConnell conceded from the start that quickly enacting a mammoth emergency government aid plan could be done only with the assent of Democrats.

In a private lunch the week before, where Republican senators dined in a larger-than-usual room to try to maintain social distance, Mr. McConnell told his colleagues that they would ultimately have to deal with “Cryin’ Chuck,” using Mr. Trump’s derisive nickname for the Democratic leader in an acid comment that caught the attention of some in the room.

“Sometimes the president has a good sense of humor,” Mr. McConnell said in an interview, acknowledging the dig. “It got a couple of laughs.”

But there was a more serious subtext: With Democrats in control of the House and Republicans wielding a thin majority in the Senate, Mr. Schumer would have to be accommodated in any final bill.

Mr. Trump had a hand in the agreement, if only by keeping his distance from the talks. At one point, Senator Patrick J. Toomey, Republican of Pennsylvania, and Steven Mnuchin, the Treasury secretary, called the White House to ask the president to weigh in on a dispute they were having about whether airlines should have to reimburse the government for aid.

Work it out yourselves, Mr. Trump told the pair on a conference call.

In the end, Democrats won what they saw as significant improvements in the measure through their resistance, including added funding for health care and unemployment along with more direct money to states. A key addition was tougher oversight on the corporate bailout fund, including an inspector general and congressionally appointed board to monitor it, disclosure requirements for businesses that benefited, and a prohibition on any of the money going to Mr. Trump’s family or his properties — although they could still potentially benefit from other provisions.

“We had to do the right thing,” Mr. Schumer said in an interview. “This bill was not going to be with us a matter of days, but for weeks, months and years. It is riskier to pass a really bad bill than to delay it.”

The giant and complex aid package known as Phase 3 was assembled and passed in remarkably short order given its scope — quick on the heels of two smaller but not insignificant aid packages.

Adding to the tense atmosphere as the measure hung in the balance, senators learned that one of their own — Senator Rand Paul, Republican of Kentucky — had tested positive for Covid-19 after going about his Senate business in proximity to his colleagues, even sneaking into the senators-only gym to swim laps in the pool. It was a surprising turn that crystallized the threat both to the nation and to the lawmakers as they remained at work on Capitol Hill.

The roots of the Senate fight dated to about 10 days earlier, when Mr. McConnell had ceded the task of finding consensus on an earlier relief measure to Mr. Mnuchin and Speaker Nancy Pelosi. The two spent so much time on the phone hammering out the deal — a bill that would provide hundreds of billions of dollars for paid leave, free coronavirus testing and food and health care aid to low-income Americans — that Ms. Pelosi arrived at a late-night news conference celebrating its passage missing a teal and gold earring, as it rolled under her desk during the many calls.

As the House was completing that package on March 13, Mr. McConnell canceled a recess set for the following week to give the Senate time to take it up. He then closed up shop for the weekend and flew home to Louisville with Justice Brett M. Kavanaugh of the Supreme Court, whose confirmation was the subject of a bitter Senate fight two years ago. They attended a ceremony installing a McConnell-backed federal judge, underscoring the leader’s well-known passion for judicial confirmations while giving the majority leader’s detractors a fat target. Democrats and their progressive allies accused him of not recognizing the urgency of the moment and taking a break, even though the House bill was not yet ready for Senate consideration.

Now the majority leader was determined to put his own stamp on the next economic aid plan, which was shaping up as far larger, and wanted to make sure Republicans controlled and got credit for the final product.

Republicans plunged ahead, pulling together their own ideas. On March 19, Mr. McConnell unveiled the Republican approach — a $1 trillion proposal that centered on $1,200 cash payments to working Americans to tide them over, guaranteed loans and large tax cuts for corporate America and a newly created program to provide grants to small businesses that kept their workers on the payroll.

Democrats had their own ideas, calling for a major infusion of cash to beleaguered hospitals and health care workers, more money for states and a major expansion of unemployment benefits — “unemployment on steroids” as Mr. Schumer called it — though they were not opposed to the cash payments. Democrats criticized the corporate aid in the Republican bill, saying they wanted restrictions on using the money for stock buybacks and raising executive pay among other conditions.

Democrats drew a particularly hard line on unemployment insurance, one Senate official said, with Mr. Schumer instructing his side to refuse to negotiate on the tax relief sought by Republicans until they had a deal on the jobless benefits. The idea was to boost the aid to the level of a laid-off worker’s pay, but when that proved logistically difficult, the two sides agreed on a $600 across-the-board supplement.

Lawmakers blew through a 5 p.m. Saturday deadline set by Mr. McConnell for getting their ideas into legislative form for a vote the next day. Still, as a handful of veteran Republican senators joined Mr. McConnell, Mr. Mnuchin and White House staff in Mr. McConnell’s office to assess the state of play, a sense of optimism prevailed. They believed they were on the cusp of a deal and that Democrats were comfortably on board.

“We all felt good, the people who were all working it out,” said Senator Lisa Murkowski, Republican of Alaska and the chairwoman of the Energy and Natural Resources Committee. Mr. McConnell issued a statement saying that because of the progress made, he had asked “chairmen to draft final legislative text that reflects their compromise products.”

The announcement alarmed Democrats, who were not yet satisfied with the deal, and Mr. Schumer’s spokesman issued a statement about 10:30 p.m. Saturday cautioning that there was “not yet an agreement, and we still have not seen large parts of the Republican draft.”

When Mr. Schumer saw it on Sunday morning, things went downhill fast. On her way into a meeting in Mr. McConnell’s office, Ms. Pelosi, who had returned from San Francisco in time to join the talks, threw cold water on the prospect for an agreement, saying that as far as she was concerned, the two sides remained apart.

Mr. Mnuchin opened the meeting by asserting that “essentially, it seems to me that we’ve reached a bipartisan agreement,” but Ms. Pelosi and Mr. Schumer balked and began outlining a number of issues that needed work in order to gain their support: expansion of unemployment insurance, additional funding for state and local governments, more aid to hospitals.

When Ms. Pelosi, who is Catholic, quoted Pope Francis and his prayer to “enlighten those responsible for the common good,” Mr. Mnuchin responded, “You quoted the pope, I’ll quote the markets,” she later recounted in televised interviews this week.

Mr. McConnell insisted that they would move ahead with a scheduled procedural vote later in the day. But as she left the room, Ms. Pelosi informed them that she would be introducing her own version shortly.

Republicans seized on Ms. Pelosi’s entry into the talks, claiming that the speaker had forced Democrats to abandon a compromise they had helped write.

“We tried to go forward on a totally bipartisan basis, and then leadership got ahold of it,” Mr. McConnell said in an interview.

Republicans were further outraged when they saw the draft House bill, a $2.5 trillion measure that included an array of progressive policies well beyond the scope of emergency aid, saying Democrats were trying to use the crisis to advance a liberal agenda. They seized on a comment by Representative James E. Clyburn of South Carolina, the No. 3 House Democrat, who said on a private conference call with Democrats that the pandemic presented “a tremendous opportunity to restructure things to our vision” — a comment Mr. McConnell brought up repeatedly.

As uncertainty swirled on Sunday in the Capitol over the fate of the legislation, Mr. Paul announced that he had tested positive for the disease. Senators were alarmed. The virus they were fighting was circulating among them.

Democrats quickly broke up their lunch and continued their discussion by conference call, and two Republican senators who had had contact with Mr. Paul, Mitt Romney and Mike Lee, both of Utah, quarantined themselves. It created another incentive for the Senate to bridge its divide as soon as possible to allow members — nearly half of them over 60 — to exit the capital.

And with members of the House falling ill and quarantine orders going into effect around the country, it was becoming clear that lawmakers from that chamber would not be returning to Washington to consider the plan. The emerging compromise would have to be acceptable enough to Democrats and Republicans that it could pass without a recorded vote.

In the Senate, Democrats’ vote to block the measure set off Republican rage, but also intensified round-the-clock negotiations to find an agreement. White House officials scrambled for a deal that would calm the markets.

“Failure could be catastrophic,” Eric Ueland, the legislative affairs director and a former top Senate aide, said as he shuttled offers and counteroffers between Mr. McConnell’s office and Mr. Schumer’s suite a short walk away on the second floor of the Capitol.

Tensions reached a breaking point on the Senate floor on Monday as Republicans assailed Democrats for holding up the aid even as Mr. Schumer and Mr. Mnuchin — now “Chuck and Steven” to one another — narrowed their differences just down the corridor. Democrats voted again to block the measure.

“This is disgraceful,” exclaimed Senator Susan Collins, Republican of Maine, in a lecture blasting the delay after Mr. Schumer objected to allowing her to speak.

After daylong negotiations on Tuesday, the two sides finally announced an agreement after midnight Wednesday and the final product drew praise and support at the White House from Mr. Mnuchin and Mr. Trump, who said the administration had been treated fairly by the Democrats.

But there was a final bit of drama as staff put the finishing touches on the 880-page bill. A group of Republican senators including Lindsey Graham of South Carolina and Ben Sasse of Nebraska objected to granting workers the extra $600 a week in unemployment benefits, arguing that it would encourage layoffs and discourage workers whose wages would be lower than the aid level from seeking jobs.

“They are very upset that somebody who is making 10, 12 bucks an hour might end up with a paycheck for four months that is more than they received last week — Oh, my God, the universe is collapsing,” said Senator Bernie Sanders, independent of Vermont and a contender for the Democratic presidential nomination. He also said that the bill was too slanted to big corporations, but that it was worthy of support.

A bid by Mr. Sasse to remove the extra jobless aid was defeated, though widely supported by Republicans. He summed up the sentiment of many in his party when he said of Mr. Sanders: “I appreciate his candor in admitting that this is kind of a big crap sandwich.”

In the end, however, no senator wanted to reject it. Every one of them voted “yes.”

Jim Tankersley and Catie Edmondson contributed reporting.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — So much has changed so quickly for Joseph Palma that he barely recognizes his life.

On Tuesday last week, he was going to work, helping passengers in the customs area of the Miami airport. The next day, he was laid off without severance or benefits. Five days later, he moved back in with his 59-year-old mother, loading his bed and his clothes into the back of his friend’s pickup truck.

Now he is staring at his bank account — totaling about $3,100 — and waiting on hold for hours at a time with the unemployment office, while cursing at its crashing website.

“I’m feeling scared,” said Mr. Palma, who is 41 and nervous about the $15,000 in medical debt he has from two recent hospital stays. “I don’t know what’s the ending. But I know I’m not in good shape.”

For the millions of Americans who found themselves without a job in recent weeks, the sharp and painful change brought a profound sense of disorientation. They were going about their lives, bartending, cleaning, managing events, waiting tables, loading luggage and teaching yoga. And then suddenly they were in free fall, grabbing at any financial help they could find, which in many states this week remained locked away behind crashing websites and overloaded phone lines.

“Everything has changed in a matter of minutes — seconds,” said Tamara Holtey, 29, an accountant for an industrial services company in the Houston area, who was on a cruise to Cozumel, Mexico, as the coronavirus outbreak intensified in the United States and was laid off on her second day back at work.

Now she spends her days applying for jobs online from her home in Alvin, Texas, while she and her wife weigh whether to delay paying their mortgage for a month or two — only to have to pay more in interest.

“It’s just a constant thought in my head: Am I going to lose my house? Am I going to lose everything?” she said. They had been talking about starting to have children, but “that’s on pause now.”

In 17 interviews with people in eight states across the country, Americans who lost their jobs said they were in shock and struggling to grasp the magnitude of the economy’s shutdown, an attempt to slow the spread of the virus. Unlike the last economic earthquake, the financial crisis of 2008, this time there was no getting back out there to look for work, not when people were being told to stay inside. What is more, the layoffs affected not just them, but their spouses, their parents, their siblings and their roommates — even their bosses.

“I don’t think anyone expected it to be like this,” said Mark Kasanic, 48, a server at a brasserie in Cleveland who was one of roughly 300 workers that a locally owned restaurant company laid off last week. Now he is home-schooling his children, ages 5 and 7, one with special needs.

Julian Bruell was one of those who had to deliver the bad news to hourly employees like Mr. Kasanic. Mr. Bruell, 30, who helps run the company with his father, said that only about 30 employees are left running takeout and delivery at two of its five restaurants. He has not been earning a salary, his goal being to keep the business afloat through the crisis.

“If it’s going to July this may not be sustainable,” he said. “I just want us to have a future.”

On Thursday, he was planning to file for unemployment himself.

In many states, that has been its own wild odyssey. Mr. Kasanic said he had spent hours dialing and redialing four Ohio numbers: three wound through a maze of messages that ended with a dead line and a fourth was always busy. His strategy now is to call at four in the morning.

“Getting through is nearly impossible,” he said. “I probably tried calling over 100 times to try to get a hold of somebody.”

Going online has not been any easier.

“I’ve gone on their website and the site would crash or pages would disappear,” he said.

He still has not gotten through. But he is trying.

Many described a feeling of sudden economic helplessness that did not match how they saw themselves. In the space of two weeks, Olivia Fernandes, 26, and her husband, Fabio, both fitness instructors in Miami, went from earning $77,000 a year to frantically trying to file for unemployment online.

Now everything is on hold as the couple, who married three years ago, scramble to figure out their newly unemployed world — from next month’s student loan payment to the long-planned vacation to Belo Horizonte, Brazil, where Ms. Fernandes would have met her in-laws for the first time.

“We watched it all collapse,” Ms. Fernandes said. “We looked at each other and said, ‘Oh my god, we have lost it all.’”

Before the outbreak, they had used much of their savings to chip away at student loans. Their health insurance coverage runs out at the end of March. Rent is due on April 1, and their landlord has made it clear that no extensions will be granted. By Ms. Fernandes’s calculations, they will have almost nothing left after April’s bills. Wearing gloves, they left their home to apply to Whole Foods and Target, but were then told to apply online.

Whether to opt for a high-risk job has turned into a common subject of conversation.

Scott Yates, 42, who was indefinitely furloughed from his job as a head bartender in one of the busiest and largest hotels in Charleston, W.Va., said he and his wife had decided not to, even though it seemed that Walmart, Sam’s Club and Kroger were “hiring left and right.”

“It’s not worth a $13-an-hour job coming home and infecting my family — and then who else does that spiderweb to?” said Mr. Yates, who has two teenagers, and on Friday got his last paycheck, which was about half of what he normally makes with tips.

The last days of work came suddenly, and had a dreamlike quality. Spring Drake, 30, an events manager at a large hotel in Charlotte, N.C., said cancellations swept her department like a wave beginning around March 9 — first a large snack industry conference, then one by an aviation association. By week’s end, its book of business was almost entirely gone and employees were told they would be working only four days a week. On March 17, four out of five event managers were furloughed. One stayed on to handle the remaining cancellations.

The normally bustling hotel was unrecognizable. She said the lights had been turned off in the main banquet hall to conserve energy.

“It was eerie almost,” said Ms. Drake, who lives in Indian Trail, N.C. “It was real silent. It was nothing but the bones of the hotel.”

When asked what she would compare it to, she could only think of a television show: “You ever seen ‘The Walking Dead’?”

Sometimes there was sweet with the bitter. Maggie Johnston, a waitress, was nervous about losing her job at Joe’s Inn, a popular neighborhood restaurant in Richmond, Va. She had turned 60 a few days before, and did not have a lot saved. On the last night the restaurant was open to diners, a customer came up and slipped her a $20 bill with a note attached: “This is for when times get tough.”

Someone started a GoFundMe for the employees. On Friday it stood at $17,000. She has received several checks in the mail, including one from a name she did not recognize. Her landlord has agreed to let her pay just half her rent until she starts work again.

“I’m humbled,” she said on Thursday. “Even though I lost my job after 20 years, it could be so much worse.”

Severe economic collapse, something like war, can bring changes so sudden that there is no time to adapt. Melissa Dellapasta, 45, was setting up a meal for executives of the Cleveland Indians on March 12 when everyone seemed to just get up and leave. An announcement had come: Baseball was postponed indefinitely. She has not worked since.

“Maybe they’ll open in April,” said Ms. Dellapasta on Thursday, what would have been opening day for Major League Baseball. Her employer runs the concessions and caters the meals at the ballpark where the Indians play. “Nobody has any idea. But I have no paycheck.”

For now, as far as rent and food, she is OK because her boyfriend is still working. He has a job at an Amazon warehouse. But they are nervous about his safety.

“There are all these new people who got hired when the restaurants shut down,” she said. “He can work overtime but he says he’s scared. He doesn’t want to be in the warehouse with all those people and get it and bring it home and give it to me. Yes, we could use the money but you can’t risk it.”

Young parents said they now understood the extreme stress their parents experienced when they had been laid off, a mood they mistook as just another bout of grown-up grumpiness.

Nawaz Haraish, 26, said that when his mother lost her job in 2012 she was suddenly home all day and “super stressed” all the time.

He understands her now. Last week Mr. Haraish lost his job as a curbside assistance worker at Terminal 4 of John F. Kennedy Airport. He is deeply worried about providing for his daughters, ages 2 and 4, whom he called “my two sweethearts.” He said his first destination after leaving the airport the day he was let go was the store, to buy diapers and wipes.

“I’m hoping the unemployment money will start coming in,” said Mr. Haraish, who lives in Richmond Hill, Queens. He said he sometimes watched YouTube videos as a distraction. One was about how to cope with anxiety. “Other than that I can’t tell you. I don’t really have a plan right now. I am super worried. But I’m trying not to let anxiety ruin me. I have my daughters. And they need a sane father.”

His mother, he said, never quite recovered.

“You can see it in her face,” he said. “She has a stressed-looking face, like she’s been through a lot.”

Sabrina Tavernise reported from Washington; Audra D.S. Burch from Miami; Sarah Mervosh from Canton, Ohio; and Campbell Robertson from Pittsburgh.

<|endoftext|>

President Trump, in saying that he wanted to reopen the economy by Easter, has argued that an economic downturn would be more deadly than the coronavirus.

What Was Said

“You have suicides over things like this when you have terrible economies. You have death. Probably — and I mean definitely — would be in far greater numbers than the numbers that we’re talking about with regard to the virus.”— at a news conference on Monday

“You’re going to lose more people by putting a country into a massive recession or depression.”— during a virtual town hall on Fox News on Tuesday

This lacks evidence. Though the question of the overall impact of recessions on mortality remains unsettled, experts disputed Mr. Trump’s claim that an economic downturn would be more deadly than a pandemic. (The White House did not respond when asked for the source of the president’s conjecture.)

“All these effects of economic expansions or recessions on mortality that can be seen, e.g., during the Great Depression or the Great Recession, are tiny if compared with the mortality effects of a pandemic,” said Dr. José A. Tapia, a professor of public health and economics at Drexel University who has written several studies on the topic.

It is difficult to disaggregate the impact of an economic downturn on health and mortality from other factors. Those who become unemployed do tend to have higher levels of depression and bad health. But for the general population, studies have found that death rates from other causes — cardiovascular disease, respiratory diseases, and traffic and industrial injuries — were either unchanged or actually decreased.

For example, a 2012 study found that suicides did increase during the Depression of the 1930s, but the death rate for car accidents decreased and no significant effects were observed for 30 other causes of death in the United States. A 2009 study found that mortality actually decreased across almost all ages during the Depression. Researchers last year also found that mortality rates overall declined from 2005 to 2010, a period that covered the deep recession that ran from late 2007 through mid-2009.

In comparison, projections from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimated that deaths from the coronavirus in the United States could range from 200,000 to 1.7 million.

Mr. Trump is right to be concerned about the trend of increased suicides during recessions, said Aaron Reeves, a professor and sociologist at Oxford University and the lead author of a 2012 study that estimated an excess of 4,750 suicides in the United States after 2007, coinciding with the recession. But in a scenario in which workplaces and businesses reopen and social distancing is more limited but people continue to wash their hands, Mr. Reeves said, “my sense is that this virus would almost certainly kill more people under those conditions than suicides would.”

Moreover, it is not inevitable that a recession would lead to excess suicides. In countries and American states with adequate social programs in place, the impact of economic downturns can be reduced.

“There are some choices that governments have about how you potentially offset the consequences of recessions that may come,” Mr. Reeves said, pointing to the $2 trillion economic package passed by the Senate. “Trump could put in place more to protect those people if he’s worried about suicides.”

Experts also warned that the argument about whether to stave off a recession or contain the coronavirus was a somewhat false choice. If efforts to mitigate the coronavirus abate and cases and deaths spiral out of control, the economy would also be affected by self-imposed lockdowns.

The mental health effects of high levels of unemployment during a recession, too, would have its parallels if the United States suffered colossal loss of lives. That would bring about “communal bereavement,” where there is widespread distress and feelings of loss even among those who do not know the deceased, and its associated health risks, said Ralph Catalano, a professor of public health at the University of California at Berkeley.

“I’d rather contain the epidemic first and then take my chances with the recession,” Mr. Catalano said. “Humans control recessions; mindless nature controls epidemics. It’s just bad medicine to mix epidemiology and economics right now.”

Curious about the accuracy of a claim? Email factcheck@nytimes.com.

<|endoftext|>

Groceries. Gasoline. Medical care. Marijuana, in some places. All have been designated essential to society in more than a dozen states that have ordered many other businesses to close.

But what about guns?

Firearm and ammunition sales have soared in recent weeks, so clearly, some Americans want them. A gun industry association is lobbying federal and state governments to categorize firearm manufacturers and dealers as critical infrastructure, complaining that F.B.I. background checks are slowing things down as more people try to purchase weapons.

But officials have been split over whether gun stores and ammunition dealers can remain open alongside pharmacies, gas stations and laundromats, leading to confusion and legal challenges as at least 19 states have issued some form of stay-at-home orders. In Ohio, Illinois and Michigan, gun stores have been deemed essential. In New York, New Jersey and Massachusetts, they have not.

In Los Angeles, where long lines of customers have been stretching out the door of some gun shops over the past few weeks, the county sheriff ordered his deputies to make sure they were closed after 10 million residents were ordered to stay at home starting last weekend. But on Tuesday, after the county’s top lawyer said the shops could stay open, the sheriff reversed his decision.

The patchwork of policies and shifting interpretations have highlighted the question of what is truly an essential business during the pandemic, with lobbyists and guns rights advocates arguing that even a public health emergency shouldn’t restrict the Second Amendment.

“People want to exercise their God-given right to bear arms and protect their families,” said Mark Oliva, a spokesman for the National Shooting Sports Foundation, the gun industry association lobbying for special protection for dealers and manufacturers.

But advocates for stricter gun safety measures argue that a run on gun stores could itself pose a public health concern if new buyers aren’t trained properly, new guns aren’t stored safely and background checks aren’t completed.

“Guns will not make Americans safer in the face of Covid-19,” said John Feinblatt, president of Everytown for Gun Safety.

Underscoring the concerns, several recent gun-related incidents have been linked to fears surrounding the pandemic.

Police in Alpharetta, Ga., on Sunday arrested a man they accused of pointing a gun at two women wearing medical masks and gloves because he feared he might contract the coronavirus. A man in New Mexico was charged last week with the accidental shooting death of his 13-year-old cousin with a gun he told police he was carrying “for protection” amid the outbreak. And in Maine, a man with a felony conviction who claimed he needed guns to protect himself during the outbreak was charged with illegally possessing a firearm.

As some states have moved to close gun shops alongside other businesses, they have faced quick legal challenges.

In Pennsylvania, gun rights advocates filed lawsuits to block Gov. Tom Wolf’s order that labeled gun stores as nonessential. Although a divided state Supreme Court dismissed the legal challenge, the governor on Tuesday allowed gun shops to reopen with protocols on social distancing.

On Monday, a federal lawsuit in New Jersey challenged Gov. Phil Murphy’s order for gun stores to close, which also prompted the State Police to shut down the state’s background check website.

Demand for firearms has been growing throughout the coronavirus outbreak, with widespread reports of firearms and survival gear flying off the shelves, including in California, New York, Washington State, Alabama and Ohio. Data from the F.B.I. show a sizable increase in background checks for gun purchases since the start of the year, though other factors, such as the national political campaign and gun control efforts by some state legislatures, might have also played a role.

transcript

“We want change, we want change ...” “I don’t understand why I could still go in a store and buy a weapon of war.” “There’s no better time than now to talk about gun control.” These are calls the American public has heard before. After Orlando — “Democrats and Republicans we spoke with agree, suspected terrorists, like the Orlando shooter, should not be allowed to purchase firearms.” After Sandy Hook — “90 percent of Americans support universal background checks.” After each mass shooting, there’s a surge of public support for stricter gun control. “A new poll from Quinnipiac University shows record high support for stricter gun laws.” So why hasn’t Washington put stricter gun laws on the books? There are several factors, ranging from partisan divides to gun owner activism to the N.R.A.’s political clout. No. 1: There’s broad support, but also big divisions on gun control. The most comprehensive data is from 2017, and it shows that 60 percent of Americans say they want stricter gun laws. Support is even higher for things like a 30-day waiting period for gun sales and universal background checks. But dig deeper, and you find the devil is in the details — and the divides. Most Democratic voters want stricter gun laws. But less than 1 in 4 Republicans agree. Most Americans who don’t own firearms say easy access to legal guns fuels gun violence. Fewer than half of gun owners agree. Non-owners want to ban assault-style weapons, while most gun owners don’t. “The person is the criminal, not the weapon.” Gun owners may be a minority, but they’re a very focused and vocal minority. Only about 3 in 10 Americans own a gun. But to them, gun control is not merely a policy issue — it’s personal. Nearly 40 percent say they always have a loaded firearm at the ready in their home. 74 percent say the right to own a gun is “essential” to their freedom. Gun owners are much more likely to contact lawmakers about gun policy, compared to non-owners, and far more likely to donate to gun advocacy and policy groups. No. 3: The N.R.A. is a formidable force in politics. Less than 20 percent of gun owners in America say they belong to the N.R.A., but it’s big enough, and disciplined enough, to turn elections and to end political careers. Part of what makes the N.R.A. so formidable is the money it spends helping friendly politicians and attacking those deemed enemies. “Ross voted against your gun rights.” The N.R.A.’s vast marketing efforts have helped turn gun ownership into a badge of cultural identity. “It is not about politics. It is a way of life. I feel like we should be able to express that.” And their catchphrases have become ubiquitous. ”You know, the guns don’t kill people,” people kill people.” No. 4: The N.R.A.’s leaders are more hard-line than its members. Polls show that N.R.A. members do support some gun control policies, like outlawing sales to the mentally ill and people on terror watch lists. Most also favor universal background checks. But time and time again, N.R.A. leaders in Washington work to kill these proposals. After Sandy Hook, N.R.A. leaders flipped the script on mass shootings. Instead of combating calls for new gun control, they actually demanded more gun rights. “The only thing that stops a bad guy with a gun is a good guy with a gun.” And finally, No. 5: Are Americans really clamoring for more gun control? Maybe not. We see spikes and public support for stricter laws in the wake of mass shootings like Columbine, Sandy Hook and Las Vegas. But in a matter of weeks, the bumps fade. In fact, overall Americans have actually grown less supportive of gun control over the past 25 years. The shootings, meanwhile, continue.

But as states began preparing for lockdowns on March 16, criminal background checks soared 300 percent compared with the same date in 2019, according to federal data shared with the National Shooting Sports Foundation. Since late February, roughly twice as many background checks have been conducted as during the same period last year, the group said.

The F.B.I. would not comment on those figures, but said in a statement that the background check system remained fully operational and asked for the public’s patience “during this period of national emergency.”

When Illinois issued an order on March 20 to close essential businesses, it included gun shops among the exemptions allowed to stay open. Since then, Second Amendment Sports, a gun shop and shooting range in McHenry, Ill., has been busy, said the store’s owner, Bert Irslinger Jr., who called sales over the past 10 days “the best we’ve ever had.”

Registration for shooting courses has also been high, he said. “We saw classes filling up fast, so we offered other dates and times so we could keep classes small” to follow social distancing guidelines, Mr. Irslinger said. “We’re no different than any other industry where practice makes perfect.”

<|endoftext|>

It can get overwhelming: a drumbeat of bleak news about the coronavirus pandemic, with events changing so fast that one week seems unrecognizable from the last.

“In the moment, it’s painful and miserable and it’s hard,” said Jeremy Ortman, a mental health counselor in New York. “We don’t know what it’s going to look like on the other side.”

But he and other experts said that, to stay resilient in uncertain and frightening times, it was critical to remember that bright spots do exist, and to keep those gleams of hope in mind. “Whenever I’ve asked people what thing they’re most proud of in their lives, it’s always connected to times of pain or strife or struggle and how they got through it,” he said.

So, you are probably asking by now, what positives are there to remember?

It’s not often that kindness and fellowship grab headlines. Maybe people are being better to each other, or maybe we’re just noticing it more.

People are serenading each other across windowsills. Animal shelters are reporting upticks in foster applications. Volunteers are buying groceries for their neighbors, cities are starting programs to feed the homeless, and stores are offering exclusive hours for older shoppers.

Responding to dire equipment shortages at hospitals, sewing circles organized on social media are stitching scraps of shower curtains and flowered fabric into masks, and craft distilleries are using spirits to make hand sanitizer, for free.

Some landlords are waiving or lowering rent, and some employers are recognizing an obligation to look out for employees. Broadway producers agreed to pay actors and stage crew workers through the next several weeks, and unions and companies negotiated to increase the salaries of some grocery store employees, who have become an indispensable work force in the crisis.

In Kansas, after schools were closed for the rest of the academic year, six tents were set up around Kansas City where students could pick up breakfast and lunch, school officials said.

More than 70 percent of the district’s 23,000 students rely on school meals.

“We’re really just trying to let everyone know that we want to do right by the students,” said Charles Foust, the superintendent of schools in Kansas City.

In Jonesboro, Ark., Ramey Myers, a co-owner of the Parsonage, a restaurant, feared she would have to lay off employees after she and her husband shut it down except for takeout. The couple panicked this month when they took in only $50 for an entire day.

But she then got a text from her landlord: “no rent April.”

With the reprieve, Ms. Myers and her husband could pay their employees for two more weeks. “Other people need to do” what her landlord did, she said, calling it, “a blessing beyond anything anyone could have done. It’s huge.”

Everyone has a chance to be heroic, Dr. Emily Landon, the chief infectious disease epidemiologist at the University of Chicago Medicine, said at a news conference last week. “It’s really hard to feel like you’re saving the world when you’re watching Netflix from your couch,” she said. “But if we do this right, nothing happens.”

Dr. Landon urged patience as Illinois enacted stay-at-home measures. “A successful shelter in place means that you’re going to feel like it was all for nothing,” she said. “You’d be right, because nothing means that nothing happened to your family. And that’s what we’re going for here.”

 On the front lines of the crisis, doctors and health care workers are finding creative ways to cope with severe shortages at hospitals, and using social media to educate the public as federal health officials have receded from view at White House briefings.

In New York, hospitals are pioneering a little-tested method of “ventilator sharing,” and the Food and Drug Administration has granted emergency use approval to a device, developed by a South Carolina-based company, that adapts one ventilator for use with four patients.

In Nebraska, administrators at the University of Nebraska Medical Center have begun an experimental procedure to decontaminate masks with ultraviolet light.

In Massachusetts, Carney Hospital will be used exclusively to treat patients with the coronavirus, and in Washington State, the U.W. Medicine’s Medical Center Northwest in Seattle converted part of a four-story parking garage into a mobile testing clinic.

K.C. Rondello, a disaster epidemiologist at the College of Nursing and Public Health at Adelphi University in New York, said he had been trying to remember these efforts even as he despairs over the patchwork response around the country.

“Ninety-five percent of what I’m seeing is bad news,” he said. “The silver lining is we’re learning as we go along. We’re making extraordinary efforts.”

Major corporations are also trying to help. The Four Seasons Hotel in Manhattan offered free lodging to doctors, nurses and other health care workers. Carmakers and Dyson are converting machines to build ventilators, clothing companies are making masks and the brewing giant Anheuser-Busch InBev is repurposing breweries for sanitizer. Facebook has donated more than 700,000 masks, and Tim Cook, the chief executive of Apple, pledged to donate millions more to the United States and Europe.

Though a vaccine is expected to be at least 12 months away, doctors are scrambling to improve testing and find anti-viral treatments. A team of hundreds of scientists from New York to Paris are testing 50 drugs as treatments against the virus.

One company has developed a “smart thermometer” that can track the coronavirus in real time, and researchers are racing to deliver new medicines.

Even the failures should be encouraging, said Dr. C. Robert Horsburgh, a professor of epidemiology at Boston University. “Doctors are practical people,” he said, noting that even tests that don’t work out can provide useful data. “If you keep trying, eventually something will work,” he said.

The mobilization in the medical field recalls organizing efforts during World War II, said Robert Citino, executive director of the Institute for the Study of War and Democracy at the National WWII Museum in New Orleans.

“I don’t think there has ever been more human ingenuity devoted to a single scientific problem than the one we’re facing right now,” he said. “I don’t think I’m being a Pollyanna when I say that, when you look at history, what you see is the immense curiosity and immense strength of human beings under crisis.”

This outbreak is bad, but experts say it contains important lessons for a disease with even worse factors. The innovations and procedures that cities, states and nations are putting in place now may prepare us for a pandemic with an even higher fatality rate.

“What we’re facing is unprecedented, and I don’t want to downplay its seriousness, but it’s not the worst-case scenario,” said Malia Jones, a researcher who studies infectious diseases at the University of Wisconsin in Madison.

The worst-case scenario, she said, would be a new strain of flu that humans have no immunity against, with a higher death rate than the coronavirus and the potential to kill billions. That scenario is akin to movies like “Contagion” and “Outbreak,” but without a vaccine that miraculously appears before the credits roll.

“I hope the takeaway here is that we’ll be better prepared to deal with the next pandemic,” Dr. Jones said. “This is a good practice run for a novel influenza pandemic. That’s the real scary scenario.”

At the very least, if the habits people are developing now stick — washing hands for 20 seconds, not touching their faces, keeping a healthy pantry, staying home instead of working sick — they could have a positive effect on outcomes of more common illnesses, like the seasonal flu.

“If we could get some basic hygiene practices as norms in the United States we would have less flu deaths,” Dr. Jones said. “That would be a wonderful outcome.”

<|endoftext|>

Good morning.

(Here’s the sign-up, if you don’t already get California Today delivered to your inbox.)

On Wednesday afternoon, Gov. Gavin Newsom took his now-usual spot behind a podium in Sacramento for a live-streamed news conference and rattled off a dizzying list of statistics.

Some 66,800 tests had been conducted, he said, once again emphasizing that the state is working with commercial labs, hospitals and universities to ramp up testing even more. California had distributed more than 24 million N95 masks and more are on the way, he said.

[Here are more of the latest updates about the coronavirus in California.]

But one number in particular stood out.

“We just passed the one million mark in claims since March 13,” Mr. Newsom said. He was talking about people filing for unemployment.

It was a jarring encapsulation of how many Californians are and will continue to be out of work, and how many will desperately need help paying their bills to stave off homelessness.

[Read about how to apply for unemployment insurance.]

Mr. Newsom announced that four of the five big banks — Citigroup, JPMorgan Chase, U.S. Bank and Wells Fargo — along with almost 200 state-chartered banks and credit unions, had agreed to put off collecting mortgage payments for up to 90 days from borrowers who can document they’ve been affected by the crisis.

He said the financial institutions also agreed not to report the late payments to credit agencies and wouldn’t start foreclosure sales or evictions.

(Absent from the 90-day agreement was Bank of America, Mr. Newsom noted more than once. The bank committed to a 30-day pause.)

Still, California’s pre-existing housing crisis has disproportionately hurt renters, who make up a large share of the state’s population. April 1 is not far away.

And although Mr. Newsom signed an executive order giving cities and counties explicit permission to halt evictions, many activists and lawmakers have said that’s not enough.

In a letter on Wednesday, more than 30 lawmakers called on Mr. Newsom to make the decision for the hundreds of cities and counties across California that haven’t taken up the suggestion.

Fewer than 50 local governments had put in place any kind of eviction limits, it said.

“During this emergency, our state needs one clear order that covers all tenants,” the letter said.

Mr. Newsom responded that the state was exploring legal ways to do that.

For landlords, halting evictions for tenants who have been affected by Covid-19 is “good business,” said Tom Bannon, who is chief executive of the California Apartment Association, one of the nation’s biggest landlord groups.

Mr. Bannon told me that while the association doesn’t formally support or oppose legally mandated eviction moratoriums, the group still advised landlords of any size to halt evictions on their own through May 31.

“Here’s the reality,” Mr. Bannon said, “If you evict somebody, the chances of getting a new resident are not good.”

That was one of several guidelines the association sent to members. The group also called on association members to commit to freezing rents during that period, waiving late fees and offering payment plans. (Stopping evictions doesn’t mean that tenants are not expected to pay the rent back eventually.)

Mr. Bannon said he knew that for many landlords, particularly ones with fewer units, even a month of lost rent can be tough to survive.

That’s why he said he was hopeful there would be enough relief money for both small businesses, like landlords, and for tenants.

[Read about what’s in the $2 trillion federal rescue package.]

“The faster you get people back to normal, the better you’re going to be,” Mr. Bannon said.

Julianna Mazziliano, an 18-year-old student at Fresno State University, told me that, in the meantime, she’s overwhelmed.

Ms. Mazziliano was working two jobs, but her hours have been slashed thanks to the coronavirus.

The catering company where Ms. Mazziliano worked is shut down for now, and she’s gotten just about five hours a week at a fast-casual pizza chain, where she’s also worried about contracting the virus while handling cash or interacting with customers. She’s taking home about $30 per week.

She said she’s gotten food from the university’s food pantry for students and she’s applied for unemployment benefits.

Still, she knows that even if evictions have been paused in Fresno, the $865 in rent she owes for a one-bedroom apartment she shares with her boyfriend, whose work has also been cut, will become just another bill due down the line.

“I think a lot of people that have money and their jobs are still operating,” Ms. Mazziliano said, “I don’t think they clearly understand what people are going through.”

At least one landlord reportedly did, though: According to The Bakersfield Californian, a local lawyer and property owner waived April rent completely and encouraged others to do the same.

[Read more about the race to head off evictions.]

We often link to sites that limit access for nonsubscribers. We appreciate your reading Times coverage, but we also encourage you to support local news if you can.

If you watch nothing else about how the coronavirus outbreak is overwhelming hospitals, make it this video, a chilling, rare look inside a hospital in New York City at the center of the pandemic. [The New York Times]

It’s not clear whether gun stores are considered essential businesses, and on Wednesday, Mr. Newsom said he’d defer to local sheriffs. [The New York Times]

Bay Area and Los Angeles schools officially said their closures will extend to at least May 1. [The Mercury News | The Los Angeles Times]

The Cheesecake Factory, based in Calabasas Hills and founded in Beverly Hills, has said it won’t pay rent on any of its restaurants. The move underscores how widespread the pain has been for restaurants of all sizes. [Eater Los Angeles]

Stephen Curry is set to hold an Instagram Q. and A. session with Dr. Anthony Fauci, the nation’s top expert on infectious diseases. [The San Francisco Chronicle]

In other news, the Clippers bought the Forum for $400 million, clearing the way for a new arena in Inglewood. [The Los Angeles Times]

My colleague Tejal Rao reported that as Americans retreat to their homes in the midst of this war against an invisible enemy, they’ve begun to look back at World War I- and II-era victory gardens as a way of soothing anxieties about food shortages.

In 2020, though, gardens are also just little slivers of the outside, where you can rest and breathe.

Anne Dazey, 66, sent this picture of her dog, William, and chickens — named after the Pac-Man ghosts Inky, Blinky and Clyde. She said in an email that William likes to keep watch over the garden while “the girls” take care of snail and bug control.

Ms. Dazey lives in what she said is a family-oriented neighborhood in Palo Alto. Walking with William, she said, is disquieting now that the streets are empty. Being at home alone for days without being able to see people at work feels isolating.

Nevertheless, Ms. Dazey said, “This ‘sheltering at home’ has been a reflective time for me.”

California Today goes live at 6:30 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com. Were you forwarded this email? Sign up for California Today here and read every edition online here.

Jill Cowan grew up in Orange County, graduated from U.C. Berkeley and has reported all over the state, including the Bay Area, Bakersfield and Los Angeles — but she always wants to see more. Follow along here or on Twitter, @jillcowan.

California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and graduated from U.C. Berkeley.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — Congress’s $2.2 trillion stabilization package headed for likely final passage on Friday will allocate more than $12 billion in funding for federal housing and rental assistance, a belated recognition that Americans cannot shelter in place from the coronavirus if they have no shelter.

The pandemic is hitting hardest in some of the most expensive housing markets in the country — New York, Seattle, San Francisco and Los Angeles — where governments were struggling with homelessness and affordable shelter long before the virus reached American shores. As businesses are ordered to close and employers lay off workers, Americans, especially low-income renters and the homeless, will feel squeezed even tighter.

The package, which cleared the Senate late Wednesday, includes over $2 billion for rental assistance and $685 million for public housing. It contains flexible funding for state and local governments, which can be used to address housing needs. It also has housing assistance for especially vulnerable groups, such as older adults, people with disabilities and people with AIDS.

The bill will impose a temporary moratorium on evictions and foreclosures for homeowners and renters living in federally subsidized apartments and homes with federally backed mortgages.

“We’re really grateful that our delegation and others were able to get a bill package together that I would describe as short-term relief,” said Gregory Russ, the chairman of the New York City Housing Authority. “But,” he added, “we are under no illusions that there will not be a need for more.”

The economic crisis precipitated by the coronavirus has hit hard in high-cost urban areas where many residents were already struggling to afford homes. About 11 million of the nation’s roughly 44 million renters were paying half their incomes in rent before the pandemic, said Mary Cunningham, the vice president for metropolitan housing at the Urban Institute. With 3.3 million people filing for unemployment compensation last week, many of them have no income at all.

The funding in the package is considerable. But administering it will be a challenge. Doug Guthrie, the president of the Housing Authority of the City of Los Angeles, said the agency’s employees, like many others still at work, were struggling with school closings and underlying health issues and advanced ages that put them at risk of infection.

“We are trying to get as many as possible set up for telecommuting, but there are great gaps in the services we can provide,” Mr. Guthrie said.

Likewise, homeless shelters, which were overcrowded before the pandemic, are scrambling to increase the space between beds to comply with quarantine guidelines put out by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

The economic stabilization bill includes $4 billion in homeless assistance grants that can be used for temporary emergency shelters, such as hotels and motels, and for personal protective equipment.

But three researchers at the University of Pennsylvania estimated that it would cost more than $11 billion for units needed to manage the coronavirus pandemic for homeless people. In the absence of those resources, the homeless are at risk of getting sick and spreading the virus.

“This will help significantly, but it won’t completely meet the need by any means,” said Maria Foscarinis, the executive director of the National Law Center on Homelessness and Poverty. “The bottom line is that this crisis makes very clear how essential housing is not only to the homeless but to the broader community.”

People who have houses backed by federally financed mortgages will get a temporary moratorium on foreclosures, and most residents and renters of federally subsidized apartments will be protected from evictions.

Those protections will be important for some, Ms. Cunningham said. But, she added, “eventually the rent is going to be due, so people will need assistance paying that back rent, and landlords need to get paid in order to pay their own mortgages and operating costs.”

The package also includes $50 million for housing for older adults, $15 million for people with disabilities, $65 million for people with AIDS and $300 million for tribal groups. There is also $2.5 million for fair housing enforcement.

The stimulus package comes after the Federal Housing Administration, which is part of the Department of Housing and Urban Development, put in place a 60-day moratorium on foreclosures and evictions for 8.1 million owners of single-family homes who have mortgages backed by the office.

The Federal Housing Finance Agency said it would do the same for the 28 million owners of single-family homes with mortgages backed by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.

The Agriculture Department followed suit for several of the rural housing properties it manages, but the package does not include funding for the department’s rural housing programs.

Until now, housing has been an issue that has been notably absent from the discussion of dislocations caused by the pandemic. Ben Carson, the secretary of housing and urban development, was named to the White House’s coronavirus task force, but despite being the only physician in President Trump’s cabinet, he has been largely silent.

<|endoftext|>

KANSAS CITY, Mo. — Rent collections are being delayed. Water restored. Jailhouse doors are swinging open.

The coronavirus, for all its devastation, is spreading a spirit of forgiveness across America and softening the country’s often uncompromising lock-’em-up ways.

Dozens of states and localities have suspended evictions and utility shut-offs. The $2 trillion stimulus bill that President Trump signed on Friday included provisions to halt evictions in some federally funded housing, defer federal student loan payments interest-free and stop collections on those who are in default. Law enforcement officials in numerous jurisdictions are refusing to send people accused of low-level offenses to jail or releasing some who are already locked up.

The efforts at leniency have bipartisan backing, with the biggest debate over just how long the generosity ought to extend. Those who have long been fighting for tenant rights or criminal justice reform all of a sudden see their views in the mainstream and argue that this is not forgiveness, but justice. Law-and-order and small-government types shudder to think of the consequences if the current mood is longstanding.

“We’re winning stuff that last week sounded radical,” said Tara Raghuveer, a tenant rights advocate in Kansas City, Mo. “We have to start demanding more.”

The calculation for public officials may be as much about practicality as good will.

How can they ask people to stay at a distance, yet pack them into crowded jail cells? How can they demand that residents hunker down at home and maintain good hygiene, yet shut off their water and kick them out of their residences?

Frank White, the executive of Jackson County, which includes Kansas City, said halting evictions during the virus outbreak was the moral thing to do.

“It doesn’t take a genius to figure out that people on the streets at a time like this is not safe for the public,” he said.

The story of one Kansas City man shows why many policymakers say this is a particularly bad time for people to be left high and dry.

Once the tube was removed from his lungs, once he could breathe on his own again, once he knew he would survive the failing heart and collapsed lung that hospitalized him for weeks, Kevin Payne headed home with much trepidation.

His landlords had asked him months earlier to vacate his apartment in Midtown Kansas City because they wanted to renovate it. He hoped they would hold off because of health issues that had hospitalized him for weeks. Yet he arrived home on this day in late February to find an eviction notice on his door.

He was forced to move out the following week, and days later the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention urged people at least 60 years old to stay in their homes because of the risk of the novel coronavirus.

Without his thousand-square-foot apartment as a safe haven, Mr. Payne wondered how this was supposed to work. He was 60 years old, in poor health, squeezing into a hotel room with his girlfriend, also in fragile health. They needed to eat healthy but were fearful of going to the grocery store, or anywhere else, for risk of exposure to the virus.

“We’re just scared to death,” he said.

Mr. Payne and his girlfriend have not left the small hotel room they now call home since checking in on March 9. Groceries, delivered to them by members of K.C. Tenants, a tenant advocacy group, are piled on a small kitchenette in the room, which is a far cry from the two-bedroom unit they shared on a quiet residential street.

They are both on disability and can probably afford the $1,500-a-month hotel room for another month, Mr. Payne said, but it is impossible to know what comes next.

Though he always paid his $505 rent on time, his landlords said in an email to The New York Times that he was a hoarder who allowed his unit to devolve into unsanitary conditions. They needed to evict him for his health and safety and that of his neighbors. He got 60 days’ notice and a month’s free rent. The court approved the eviction in early February, weeks before anyone realized how the coronavirus would grip the country.

Since then, eviction court proceedings have been suspended statewide in 27 states, and numerous local jurisdictions have acted to do so on their own, according to a list compiled by Emily A. Benfer, a visiting law professor at Columbia Law School. But only 13 states have banned the enforcement of evictions statewide, addressing an important loophole.

Six days after the presiding judge in Jackson County issued an order that suspended most court proceedings, a court deputy showed up at an older woman’s home on March 18 to evict her. It turned out that while the judge’s order prevented pending cases from proceeding, it did not stop cases that already had been decided.

Ms. Raghuveer, the director of K.C. Tenants, spoke by phone with the deputy enforcing the eviction, and he told her, “The judge has signed off on the eviction, and we need to proceed with it,” according to a recording of the conversation provided by Ms. Raghuveer.

In a subsequent phone conversation, a supervisor at the court told Ms. Raghuveer that it was “business as usual” and he had six deputies out who were each executing several evictions.

After a public outcry, the presiding judge, David M. Byrn, issued an order the next day halting eviction enforcement in Jackson County.

Still, housing advocates say governmental officials need to go a step further and provide rental subsidies so tenants do not fall too far behind on their payments.

“The thing that scares me probably more than anything right now is just the incredible onslaught of evictions that may be waiting for poor and working-class people on the other end of these moratoria,” Ms. Raghuveer said.

The Senate’s stimulus package is not as forgiving as many liberal activists would like to see. There is no student loan debt cancellation, rental assistance for tenants in private housing, utility protections or unemployment and cash benefits for undocumented immigrants.

The question, for some, is where does amnesty end? Landlords have bills to pay, too. Utility companies cannot pump power and water into homes for free. And some law enforcement officials worry that without consequences, lawbreakers may feel emboldened to do as they please.

Clark Neily, the vice president of criminal justice at the Cato Institute, a libertarian policy research group, said he was all for reducing the jail population because he believed way too many people were locked up to begin with. He was not so sure, however, about the feasibility of long-term forgiveness for nonpayment of rent and utilities.

“If you create a situation where people know someone else will pay their rent and they can’t be thrown out of their apartment, they become less disciplined,” he said.

Policymakers on the left say they hope this moment of reprieve for those living on the edge will prompt the country to reconsider how it does things in the first place. Perhaps, they say, people might see that crime does not spike when low-level offenders are not incarcerated, or that there are ways to deal with someone behind on rent that benefits everybody.

“This is an opportunity for us to dissect some of these policies to ensure that they’re right,” said Danyelle Solomon, the vice president of race and ethnicity at the Center for American Progress, a liberal think tank. “And not only right, but that they’re equitable.”

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — President Trump said Thursday that he planned to label different areas of the country as at a “high risk, medium risk or low risk” to the spread of the coronavirus, as part of new federal guidelines to help states decide whether to relax or enhance their quarantine and social distancing measures.

“Our expanded testing capabilities will quickly enable us to publish criteria, developed in close coordination with the nation’s public health officials and scientists, to help classify counties with respect to continued risks posed by the virus,” Mr. Trump said in a letter to the nation’s governors.

In it, the president thanked Republican and Democratic governors alike for “stepping up to help America confront this unprecedented global pandemic.”

But in a video teleconference with governors to discuss the response to the virus, and in a television appearance late Thursday night, Mr. Trump struck a less conciliatory tone, criticizing some of them instead for “taking” from the federal government.

In the call, he rebuffed a plea from Gov. Jay Inslee of Washington for a more forceful response to the outbreak, according to two officials familiar with the conversation. Later, during an interview with the Fox News host Sean Hannity, the president singled out Mr. Inslee as well as Gov. Gretchen Whitmer of Michigan for requesting federal aid at all.

“We have people like Governor Inslee, he should be doing more,” Mr. Trump said. “He shouldn’t be relying on the federal government.” The president called Mr. Inslee a “failed presidential candidate” who was “always complaining.”

As for Ms. Whitmer, who has sent Mr. Trump a request for a major disaster declaration for her state, he did not refer to her by name.

“We had a big problem with a woman governor — you know who I’m talking about — from Michigan,” the president said. “All she does is sit there and blame the federal government, she doesn’t get it done and we send her a lot.” He said he did not like dealing with governors who “take and then they complain” and described Ms. Whitmer as a new governor who “has not been pleasant.”

He also reiterated his desire to start opening up some parts of the country in the near future. “I think we can start by opening up certain parts of the country, the farm belt, certain parts of the Midwest, other places,” he said.

Mr. Trump previewed the new set of federal guidelines in his letter as the death toll from the virus in the United States passed 1,000, and in hot spots like New York, 100 people had died because of the virus in one day. Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York said on Thursday that the worst days and weeks of the crisis were still ahead.

But Mr. Trump, in his letter, said the goal of the new rules was to look toward the day when Americans could “resume their normal economic, social and religious lives.”

Earlier in the week, he said he wanted to reopen the country for business by Easter, on April 12, despite widespread warnings from health officials that the worst effects of the virus were still weeks away and prematurely lifting social distancing guidelines would result in unnecessary deaths.

At the time, Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, a leading health expert on the administration’s coronavirus task force, said the additional testing now available gave the administration some “flexibility in different areas” to do so.

“People might get the misinterpretation you’re just going to lift everything up,” Dr. Fauci said, explaining Mr. Trump’s impatience to jump-start the economy and tell Americans they could resume everyday life. “That’s not going to happen,” Dr. Fauci said. “It’s going to be looking at the data” in regions of the country where there was not an obvious outbreak of the virus.

As a practical matter, however, Mr. Trump does not have the power to decide whether the country can reopen. He can issue federal guidelines, but the decision of whether to return to business as usual is up to each state.

“States are understood to have a general power to legislate for the health, welfare, safety and morals for the people of their state,” said Andrew Kent, who teaches constitutional law at Fordham University’s School of Law.

The administration released its first set of federal guidelines to slow the spread of the coronavirus on March 16. The 15-day plan included closing schools and telling people to avoid groups of more than 10 as well as bars, restaurants, food courts and discretionary travel.

Mr. Trump has been eager to send a message to the business community and to the markets that there is an end date to the economic standstill caused by the coronavirus and the response to it.

But public health experts warned that there needed to be a nationwide approach to fighting the spread of a virus that could easily move around the country just as it has done around the globe. And many expressed horror at the idea of pulling back on mitigation efforts too early.

Since his declaration of an Easter timeline, his aides have made clear that it was meant less as an edict and more as an ambition. Kellyanne Conway, the counselor to the president, said Thursday that the administration would “follow the facts of the data” in the new guidelines it issued.

Stephanie Grisham, the White House press secretary, said in an interview with “Fox & Friends” that the president “wants to have a message of hope to the American people.”

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — Faced with a torrent of criticism from cities and states that have been pleading for help to deal with the most critically ill coronavirus victims, President Trump announced on Friday that the federal government would buy thousands of ventilators from a variety of makers, though it appeared doubtful they could be produced in time to help hospitals that are now overwhelmed.

His announcement came shortly after authorizing the government to “use any and all authority available under the Defense Production Act,” a Korean War-era authority allowing the federal government to commandeer General Motors’ factories and supply chains, to produce ventilators.

It was the latest example of Mr. Trump’s mixed messages about how to ramp up production to meet a national crisis. Just 24 hours before, he had dismissed the complaints of mayors and governors who said that they were getting little of the equipment they needed for an expected onslaught of serious cases. And this week he praised companies that — General Motors included — were rallying to help provide necessary equipment.

But he turned on G.M. on Friday, accusing it of “wasting time” and seeking to “rip off” the government. “Our fight against the virus is too urgent to allow the give-and-take of the contracting process to continue to run its normal course,” the president said.

But it was unclear whether Mr. Trump’s use of the law would make much difference. He was essentially ordering the company to do something it had already arranged to do: G.M. announced earlier on Friday that it was moving forward with an emergency joint venture with a small manufacturer, Ventec Life Systems, even in the absence of a contract from the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

Company executives seemed stunned by the president’s effort to command them to carry through with an effort they had initiated.

In a late-afternoon news conference, Mr. Trump said, “Now it turns out we will have to be producing large numbers.” He said that over the next 100 days, “we will either make or get, in some form, over 100,000 additional units,” more than three times the nation’s annual production. Later, he insisted, “We’re going to have plenty.”

Most of those will have to come from finding existing units, industry executives say, because production lines are already stretched to the limit.

Mr. Trump appointed Peter Navarro, the China hawk among his trade advisers, to coordinate use of the Defense Production Act, and Mr. Navarro immediately made it clear that the White House planned to make an example of G.M.

Mr. Trump’s announcement at his coronavirus task force’s daily briefing came on a day of intensive criticism of the administration’s slow response and lack of leadership in a pandemic that has now resulted in over 1,500 deaths in the United States. More than 100,000 people here have been infected with the coronavirus, according to a New York Times database. The United States is the only country so far to hit that milestone.

Much of the criticism has focused on the absence of sufficient stockpiles of basic materials like masks and ventilators, and especially on the lack of urgency in organizing increased production and distribution.

Officials in more than 200 American cities, large and small, report a dire need for face masks, ventilators and other emergency equipment to respond to the coronavirus outbreak, according to a survey released on Friday.

“It is abundantly clear that the shortage of essential items such as face masks, test kits, personal protective equipment, ventilators and other items needed by health and safety personnel has reached crisis proportions in cities across the country,” Tom Cochran, the chief executive of the United States Conference of Mayors, said in a letter accompanying the survey’s findings.

Mr. Trump responded late Friday afternoon that “we have done a hell of a job” and wanted mayors and governors to “be appreciative.” He accused his critics of seeking political advantage.

More than 90 percent — or 192 cities — told the conference that they did not have an adequate supply of face masks for police officers, firefighters or emergency workers. In addition, 92 percent of cities reported a shortage of test kits to diagnose who has contracted the virus — a problem Mr. Trump has said in recent days was all but solved — and 85 percent said they did not have a sufficient supply of ventilators available to health facilities.

Roughly two-thirds of the cities said they had not received any emergency equipment or supplies from their state, the report said. And of those that did receive state aid, nearly 85 percent said it was not enough to meet their needs.

In total, the conference tabulated that cities needed 28.5 million face masks, 24.4 million other items of personal protection equipment, 7.9 million test kits and 139,000 ventilators.

But it is the ventilator issue that swamped the White House late this week, as mayors, governors and members of Congress predicted that doctors would have to leave some patients to die in the coming weeks because the machines would not be available.

In New York, the epicenter of the virus in the United States, doctors and nurses have reported that they were being forced to experiment with putting several patients on a single ventilator — a largely untested, unapproved practice that state authorities are now permitting in an effort to keep alive older adults or immunocompromised patients who could not breathe on their own.

Stories of nurses reusing 85-cent masks because they are in short supply, or others using plastic bags to cover their faces, have reinforced an image of a nation that, for all of its advanced medicine, was caught ill prepared and underfunded by a pandemic.

Both the president and Dr. Deborah L. Birx, the top health expert on his coronavirus task force, have played down the immediate need for a large number of ventilators in New York and other states.

“We were reassured after meeting with colleagues in New York there are still beds remaining and over 2,000 ventilators that have not been used yet,” Dr. Birx said on Thursday. “To say that to the American people, to make the implication when they need a hospital bed, it won’t be there, or when they need that ventilator, it won’t be there, we don’t have evidence of that right now.”

But Mr. Trump went much further in an interview on Fox.

“I don’t believe you need 40,000 or 30,000 ventilators,” Mr. Trump said Thursday night, discussing an urgent request from Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York. “You know, you’re going to major hospitals sometimes, they’ll have two ventilators. And now, all of a sudden, they’re saying, can we order 30,000 ventilators?”

Mr. Trump’s accusation that the need was being inflated prompted special anger in New York.

“When the president says the state of New York doesn’t need 30,000 ventilators, with all due respect to him, he’s not looking at the facts of this astronomical growth of this crisis,” said Mayor Bill de Blasio of New York City. “If they don’t have a ventilator, a lot of people are just not going to make it.”

A ventilator, Mr. de Blasio added, “means someone lives or dies.”

And Mr. Cuomo, responding to an accusation by the president that New York was warehousing the ventilators it was being sent rather than immediately deploying them, said that the current number of hospitalizations did not yet require their use, but that the state was bracing for a sharp rise in cases in the coming weeks. “We’re gathering them in a stockpile so when we need them, they will be there,” he said.

The city now has more than 23,000 cases of the coronavirus, a quarter of the nation’s total, and deaths are already approaching 400.

Mr. Trump’s abrupt change on the need for ventilators appeared to be in response to news reports that his administration had decided at the last minute not to announce a $1.5 billion contract with G.M. because of concern about the high cost and slow delivery of the machines.

Those reports prompted Mr. Trump to lash out first at the cities, then at G.M. and its chief executive, Mary T. Barra, who he accused of inaction.

The company has pared back its early estimates of how many ventilators it could ship in April or May, reducing them to 5,000 to 7,500 from 20,000. But even that would be a huge surge; its partner, Ventec, produces only a few hundred a month.

Critics of the Trump administration have said that planning for increased production should have begun in late January or February, when the alarm sounded that the virus was headed to the United States. And even with the president’s announcement on Friday, it appeared highly unlikely that many new ventilators would reach the cities in time for this first, devastating wave of the coronavirus.

Existing manufacturers like Medtronic and Ventec said they stepped up production weeks ago, but they were limited by the availability of parts from more than a dozen countries.

That suggests that the overall boost will not have a major effect until early summer, industry executives said — perhaps in time for a “second wave” of infections.

Because Mr. Trump played down the severity of the coronavirus for much of January and February, and into the beginning of March, the White House got a late start in assessing how much equipment would be needed.

His son-in-law and senior adviser, Jared Kushner, began focusing on the shortages only two weeks ago, and started with the critical absence of test kits, which has made it impossible to map how far the virus has spread or to identify emerging hot spots.

Then Mr. Kushner focused on the medical equipment shortages, working with the National Association of Manufacturers, the Business Roundtable and groups of former and current executives who gathered under the hashtag #StopTheSpread. Some of those executives now say they are operating on their own and no longer coordinating with the White House because they could not get clear signals about what the government wanted, or when.

But it was the G.M.-Ventec deal that attracted the most attention because it seemed the model for a crash merger of high-technology and deep manufacturing experience. G.M. was moving ahead in its Kokomo, Ind., factory, where it makes precision electronic components.

The White House had been preparing to unveil the G.M.-Ventec joint venture this week, and had hoped to announce that upward of 20,000 ventilators would be available in weeks, and that ultimately 80,000 would be produced. But the company complained that FEMA would not commit to spending the $250 million or so it would take to retool the factory.

And with FEMA still evaluating a $1.5 billion proposal from those companies, Mr. Trump got angry at news reports that described the bureaucratic maneuvering. He soon blamed G.M.

On Friday morning, Mr. Trump declared on Twitter that the company “MUST immediately open their stupidly abandoned Lordstown plant in Ohio, or some other plant, and START MAKING VENTILATORS, NOW!!!!!!”

He angrily accused G.M. of backtracking and “as usual with ‘this’ General Motors, things just never seem to work out.” He claimed the company had promised 40,000 ventilators, and “now they are saying it will only be 6000, in late April, and they want top dollar. Always a mess with Mary B.,” a Ms. Barra.

Within an hour, G.M. and Ventec announced that they would begin producing ventilators at the Kokomo plant, and that the machines would be “scheduled to ship as soon as next month.”

But the statement offered no estimates of numbers and did not address the president’s criticism — leaving it unclear if the companies would simply begin production themselves.

David E. Sanger and Annie Karni reported from Washington, and Maggie Haberman from New York. Noah Weiland contributed reporting from Washington.

<|endoftext|>

With tens of millions of Americans under orders to stay at home or practice social distancing, scores have been converging on places like Yellowstone, Grand Teton and the Great Smoky Mountains to escape the specter of the coronavirus — until now.

On Tuesday, the National Park Service announced that all three national parks would be closed immediately to prevent the spread of the virus, citing concerns about crowding and requests from local public health authorities. Even the governor of Montana had pressed for the closing of Yellowstone.

At the Great Smoky Mountains National Park, which straddles the border of Tennessee and North Carolina and was the busiest national park last year, officials reported a surge in visitors during the past week.

They said that 30,000 people visited the park each day — 5,000 more a day than last March — and caused congestion at several of the park’s most popular sites.

“Visitors from across the country have flocked to the area due to spring break, wildflowers and warm weather conditions,” the park said in an announcement.

The closing at Great Smoky Mountains National Park, which the park service said welcomed 12.5 million visitors in 2019, is in effect through April 6.

Yellowstone and Grand Teton, the sixth and the eighth most visited national parks last year with 7.4 million visitors between them, announced that they were closed until further notice. Park officials said county health officials in Wyoming and Montana had requested the closings.

On Sunday, Gov. Steve Bullock of Montana wrote a letter to Yellowstone’s superintendent, Cameron Sholly, and urged that he close the park.

“While our public lands afford many Americans with an opportunity to embrace the health benefits connected to the outdoors during the unprecedented challenges from the Covid-19 pandemic, Yellowstone’s current approach to visitation is promoting unnecessary travel that both undermines our efforts to reduce exposures and exacerbates risks for all Montanans,” Mr. Bullock wrote.

Mr. Bullock cautioned that keeping the park open had a spillover effect.

“Visitors are not only concentrating in the parks themselves but are also straining local grocery and other facilities at a time when local officials are attempting to curtail gatherings and meet the need for essential services,” he wrote.

In a joint statement, Mr. Sholly and Grand Teton’s acting superintendent, Gopaul Noojibail, said that they were heeding that advice.

“The National Park Service listened to the concerns from our local partners and, based on current health guidance, temporarily closed the parks,” they said. “We are committed to continued close coordination with our state and local partners as we progress through this closure period and are prepared when the timing is right to reopen as quickly and safely as possible.”

<|endoftext|>

Public health officials have stressed the importance of keeping a clean house to prevent the spread of the coronavirus.

Yet people who rely on professional house cleaners are struggling over whether to keep the service or to cancel it to maintain social distance. Even doctors are conflicted.

Dr. Ashwani Garg, medical director of the physician assistant program at North Central College in Illinois, has children with asthma, but said he had decided not to stop his cleaning service. The worker his family employs wears protective foot gear, a mask and gloves while cleaning their home, he said.

“We have a slight amount of risk,” said Dr. Garg, who specializes in family and lifestyle medicine. “But we’re still having the cleaning lady come because it would make us feel less stressed and happy to have a clean home.”

Lisa Cuchara, a professor of biomedical sciences at Quinnipiac University, said that as “a germophobe,” she was limiting all interactions with people, including those armed with bleach and disinfectant wipes.

“I wouldn’t want people in my home,” she said. “Personally, I would take the stance of being more conservative because I want this to end sooner. The more lax we are, the longer this is going to go on.”

Layered on top of public health worries is an ethical question about whether wealthier customers who cancel their service should still pay house cleaners, who are often immigrants and low-wage workers. The pandemic has caused deep concern among domestic workers who have lost once-steady gigs cleaning the homes of not only upper- and middle-class families, but also elderly and disabled people who are unable to scrub their own toilets and floors.

Cindy Bauccio, who has been cleaning houses since 2004, said she had had repeated cancellations in the last two weeks.

“I’m not losing clients, I’m losing business,” said Ms. Bauccio, who lives in Dingmans Ferry, Pa., and has many elderly clients who are unable to clean their homes but have canceled anyway.

“They’d rather be on the safe side,” she said. “And I understand: They’re scared of what’s happening.”

Ms. Bauccio rarely leaves the house except to work and interacts only with her husband, she said, who is unemployed and also stays at home. The couple relies on her housekeeping jobs.

“I’m worrying about paying the mortgage, never mind putting food on the table,” she said.

Professor Cuchara said that compared with other service workers who might come into a house, a cleaner is certainly safer.

“They have to worry about infectious disease all the time,” she said. “I think it seems that they’re the most prepared than all of us to deal with it. It’s tough to know where to draw the line. We’re doing takeout and delivery and not testing the food workers.”

The National Domestic Workers Alliance, an advocacy group, has recommended that house cleaners stop entering private homes for the duration of the crisis to protect themselves and clients.

“The kind thing to do, if you are a person of means, is to pay them what you normally would this month knowing that when they will come back to work, they will be happy to come back to your home and continue to build a long-term working relationship together,” the organization said in a statement. “The best thing for everyone’s health is stay home to slow the spread of the virus, and that includes supporting domestic workers so that they can stay at home.”

Dr. Garg said he had cut down on the risk by providing his own cleaning supplies. He and his family stay seven feet away from the house cleaner as she mops, sweeps and vacuums to keep her — and themselves — safe.

Dr. Garg said he was also motivated to keep his house cleaner employed.

“I would say it’s an essential service because cleaning the home is part of health,” he said.

Still, while a clean home relieves stress for him, Dr. Garg said those who would be too worried having their regular cleaner in the house should pause the service.

“Mental health is still important,” he said. “Everyone has to find their sweet spot.”

Stress is a valid consideration in the decision to keep or cancel cleaning services, according to K.C. Rondello, a disaster epidemiologist and professor at the College of Nursing and Public Health at Adelphi University in New York.

Dr. Rondello said he was pausing his house cleaning service for now, but would continue to pay his cleaner until he feels it is safe for her to return.

“This is a person you’re inviting into your most intimate space,” he said. “The reason we quarantine people at home is because we are trying to keep them in a safe place that is separated from the risks of the outside world.”

When you invite any outsider into the home you are increasing that risk incrementally, Dr. Rondello said.

He added, “Each time, it’s another roll of the dice in terms of whether you’re going to be exposed.”

<|endoftext|>

Joe Alonso, the head stonemason at the Washington National Cathedral, had tended to the building for 35 years. He knew its nooks and crannies.

So when news spread of a shortage of N95 masks needed to fight the coronavirus outbreak, Mr. Alonso remembered something nobody else did: More than 7,000 masks — purchased in 2005 or 2006 amid worries about an avian flu outbreak — were stashed away in an unfinished burial vault in the cathedral’s crypt.

“Over the last month, you start hearing, ‘N95 masks, N95 masks,’” he said. “I was like, ‘Oh yeah, all those N95 masks in the burial vault.’”

The cathedral donated 5,000 masks on Wednesday to two Washington hospitals to help doctors, nurses and others fight the coronavirus outbreak, part of a worldwide search that is turning up millions of desperately needed masks, sometimes in unusual places.

On Thursday, a health care union called the S.E.I.U.-U.H.W. said it had found a whopping 39 million masks from a private company based in Pennsylvania that distributes medical supplies and pharmaceuticals. The masks were being sold for $5 each to groups like Kaiser Permanente and the Greater New York Hospital Association, the union said, adding that it had no financial interest at stake.

For some multinational companies, the masks were part of a preparedness strategy for a variety of disasters.

Goldman Sachs has donated 600,000 N95 masks, “procured in the wake of previous epidemics,” with 400,000 going to hospitals in New York and New Jersey, Leslie Shribman, a spokeswoman for Goldman Sachs, said on Thursday. Abroad, Goldman Sachs is also donating 50,000 N95 masks to Britain’s National Health Service. Ms. Shribman declined to say where the masks were stored and how many masks in total the company had in its stockpile.

Nasdaq announced in a news release Wednesday that it had donated 12,000 face masks this month to the Greater New York Hospital Association and that the company would continue to collect additional masks from its clients. William Briganti, a spokesman for Nasdaq, said the company had face masks on hand as part of its “global crisis preparedness and business continuity plans” and could distribute them to employees in case of earthquakes, fires or a pandemic.

Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, said in a statement Sunday that Facebook had donated its “emergency reserve” of 720,000 masks, which were purchased during recent wildfires in California. The company is “working on sourcing millions of more to donate,” he said.

Apple procured 10 million masks to donate to “the medical community in the United States,” its chief executive, Tim Cook, said in a video posted to Twitter on Wednesday, adding that “millions more” would be provided in Europe. A spokesman for the company declined to provide further details about the masks.

While some companies were donating what is in their reserves, Pornhub purchased and donated 50,000 surgical masks to New York-area medical professionals and emergency responders, a spokesman for the company said on Thursday. The company did not say where it obtained the masks.

Lawrence O. Gostin, a professor of global health law at Georgetown University, said that it was good that these companies and institutions had a philanthropic instinct to donate masks, but that quality checks and quality assurance were needed.

“What these companies should be doing is offering funding for the makings of new masks that have specified quality,” Mr. Gostin said. “One has to ponder how it is that private companies that just have marginal needs for masks at best have huge stockpiles that they can donate, and that the government doesn’t have enough in its strategic reserve.”

At the cathedral, the 2,000 masks not donated were being kept as a “reserve supply for pastoral needs as they rise,” said Kevin Eckstrom, a spokesman for the cathedral, but the cathedral will re-evaluate the needs in the coming days.

He said the “first priority was to get the majority of them out to the folks who need them most immediately.”

The cache of masks was stored in 30 cases in an unfinished section of a burial vault that was built in the 1920s, Mr. Alonso said. In another section, the crypt contains the remains of people interred in the cathedral and several chapels.

The boxes with the masks were pushed back into concrete niches, which had openings that were 3 feet by 3 feet, originally meant to hold coffins, Mr. Alonso said. The niches have been used mostly for storage, he said.

“It’s really in the bowels of the cathedral, you could almost say,” he said.

The masks had expired, Mr. Eckstrom said, but were determined to be safe to use after consulting with the mask manufacturer and following guidance from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

“It’s a burial vault,” Mr. Alonso said. “It’s dry as a bone, as they say, down there. And kind of climate controlled. Very steady, low-humidity environment down in the crypt there.”

He said that discovering and retrieving the masks was not like the experience some people had imagined: Cathedral workers did not crawl, like Indiana Jones, through any skulls or bones in an ancient crypt.

Then again, Mr. Alonso said, he and others did have to crawl about 12 feet deep into burial slots to get the masks — “deeper than a normal-length casket” — wearing masks of their own against the dust.

He added: “We had a little human chain going. Over the last couple days, we got them out, sorted them out.”

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — President Trump on Friday signed a sweeping $2 trillion measure to respond to the coronavirus pandemic, but not before a late objection from a lone rank-and-file Republican forced hundreds of lawmakers to rush back to the capital even as the virus continued to spread through their ranks.

The move by Representative Thomas Massie, Republican of Kentucky, accomplished an extraordinary feat, uniting President Trump and John Kerry, the former Democratic secretary of state and presidential candidate, in a bipartisan moment of outrage against a lawmaker who wanted to force the whole House to take a formal roll-call vote.

House Democrats and Republicans teamed up to bring just enough lawmakers back to the Capitol to thwart Mr. Massie’s tactic, and the measure passed on a voice vote. It was a resounding show of support for a bill that lawmakers in both parties said was imperfect, but essential to address a national public health and economic crisis.

“I want to thank Democrats and Republicans for coming together and putting America first,” Mr. Trump said on Friday as he signed the legislation in the Oval Office. But by then, the spark of bipartisanship appeared to have faded. While the legislation was the product of a compromise among Republicans, Democrats and the administration, Mr. Trump did not invite any Democrats to the White House to celebrate its enactment, as is typical.

The measure is unparalleled in its scope and size, touching on every aspect of the country in an effort to send help to desperate Americans, provide aid to hospitals combating the disease, and bolster an economy forced to slow or shut down altogether to minimize the spread of the pandemic.

In weeks, it will send direct payments of $1,200 to individuals earning up to $75,000, with smaller payments to those with incomes of up to $99,000 and an additional $500 per child. It will substantially expand jobless aid, providing an additional 13 weeks and a four-month enhancement of benefits — including an extra $600 per week — and extend it to freelancers and gig workers. The package also suspends all federal student loan payments for six months through September, and the loans will not accrue interest during that period.

For companies struggling under the strain of the crisis, the measure will provide $377 billion in federally guaranteed loans to small businesses and establish a $500 billion government lending program for distressed companies, including allowing the administration the ability to take equity stakes in airlines that received aid to help compensate taxpayers. It also sends $100 billion to hospitals on the front lines of the pandemic.

For the 116th Congress, which began in the middle of a government shutdown and emerged only weeks ago from a bitter impeachment fight, the enactment of a mammoth government aid bill capped off a remarkable flurry of bipartisan cooperation and expedited legislative work.

But in the final hours before its approval, chaos reigned on Capitol Hill, as Mr. Massie, a libertarian with a penchant for using procedural maneuvers to try to block legislation, declared that a spending measure of such proportions should not receive congressional approval without every lawmaker having to record a position.

That threatened to upend a plan by House leaders to hold a voice vote on the package, sparing most lawmakers a potentially dangerous trip back to Washington as public health officials have advised people to shelter in place and avoid large gatherings. Instead, the leaders in both parties had to summon dozens of members back to the capital — piling into cars or securing seats on near-empty red-eye flights — so that enough of them would be present in the House chamber to block Mr. Massie’s request.

Mr. Trump took to Twitter to berate the Kentucky Republican, calling him a “third rate Grandstander,” and Mr. Kerry replied that Mr. Massie “must be quarantined to prevent the spread of his massive stupidity.” That drew an appreciative retweet from the president, who said he was “Very impressed” with the Democrat’s sense of humor.

Mr. Massie’s own colleagues in both parties were even more scathing. Representative Peter T. King, Republican of New York, said on Twitter that his colleague would have blood on his hands if lawmakers became infected.

Despite the widespread disdain for Mr. Massie, his late objection — like one raised by Senate Republicans in the hours before the measure unanimously passed that chamber on Wednesday — pointed to some lingering ideological divides over the government’s role in confronting a crisis. The political backlash that followed the 2008 bailout of Wall Street and the enormous stimulus program that followed in 2009 hung over the discussions, and members of Congress are keenly aware that voters are closely watching their actions.

“They don’t want a recorded vote,” Mr. Massie told reporters of congressional leaders. “They don’t want to be on record on making the biggest mistake in history.”

In under four weeks, lawmakers have produced three substantial proposals to confront the coronavirus, agreeing to emergency government help, expansions of the social safety net and financial bailouts that would have seemed unthinkable only a few weeks ago. Mr. Trump has signed all of them.

Now that the largest of those is law, attention will turn to its effect on a battered economy, where 3.3 million filed for unemployment last week, entire industries are in peril and many experts say a package of its size can provide a few months of ballast — if that — before more help is needed. The administration now must scramble to find ways of enforcing the vast new programs, including an array of benefits for Americans and aid to nearly every industry — as well as strict oversight measures to make sure bailed-out companies do not use the help to enrich themselves at the expense of their workers.

The law creates disclosure requirements, an inspector general and a congressionally mandated board to monitor a $425 billion bailout fund to be administered by the Federal Reserve. It also bars companies that receive government infusions from doing stock buybacks for as long as they are benefiting from federal aid, in addition to a year afterward. Companies owned by Mr. Trump and members of his family are barred from receiving any of the bailout money, although the president’s real estate company could potentially benefit from other aspects of the stimulus law.

About two hours after Mr. Trump signed the legislation, however, the White House issued a signing statement undermining a crucial safeguard Democrats had demanded as a condition of agreeing to the corporate bailout fund. The law empowers the inspector general to request information from executive branch agencies and requires the official to report any unreasonable refusal to Congress “without delay.” But Mr. Trump suggested his constitutional powers permit him to decide what information to share with lawmakers.

Democrats have vowed to push for a fourth round of government help that would address priorities left uncovered by the bill signed on Friday, including more benefits for workers and funds for hospitals, but it was unclear whether Republicans would agree that additional aid was needed.

“The option that we have is to either let them suffer with nothing, or to allow this greed and billions of dollars, which will be leveraged into trillions of dollars, to contribute to the largest income inequality gap in our future,” said Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, Democrat of New York. “There should be shame about what was fought for in this bill, and the choices that we have to make.”

But a sense of urgency in the face of a national crisis prevailed, prompting most lawmakers to offer their support even as the coronavirus continued to spread through Congress. Two more representatives announced on Friday that they had tested positive for the virus — Joe Cunningham, Democrat of South Carolina, and Mike Kelly, Republican of Pennsylvania — bringing the total in the House to four. Senator Rand Paul, Republican of Kentucky, reported on Sunday that he had the disease. Dozens more lawmakers have quarantined themselves out of an abundance of caution.

“We have members on both sides of the aisle who have the virus,” Representative Kevin McCarthy, Republican of California and the minority leader, told reporters on Thursday. “We have members who are quarantined. We have members who have challenges with their flights canceled. The floor will look different.”

Lawmakers who entered the chamber on Friday had to clean their hands with sanitizer and enter through one door, before scrubbing again and leaving through another, as if coming and going from an operating room. Once inside the chamber, they kept their distance — leaving several seats between one another — with a container of wipes for lawmakers to use left in each row.

The hours of debate grew fiery at moments as lawmakers sought to maintain a brisk pace of statements.

Representative Haley Stevens, a freshman Democrat from Michigan who drove through the night to reach the Capitol on Friday morning, wore pink latex gloves in a nod to the risks faced by medical professionals. Ms. Stevens, whose district has been rocked by both the spread of the virus and the resulting economic slowdown, was repeatedly ruled out of order after an emotional outburst in which she pleaded with colleagues to “take this disease seriously.”

“I rise for every American who is scared right now!” Ms. Stevens shouted, as the presiding officer, Representative Anthony Brown, Democrat of Maryland, banged his gavel in a futile attempt to silence her. As other members shouted from the floor, she pressed on, delivering an impassioned message to doctors and nurses: “You will see darkness! You will be pushed! And our society needs you to stand together at this time!”

As she spoke in favor of the bill at the close of the debate, Ms. Pelosi repeatedly prodded all members who were present to assemble, drawing out her praise for the legislation to give lawmakers more time to filter into the chamber. To maintain appropriate social distance, they began filling the seats in the galleries typically reserved for the public, which have been closed in recent days during the pandemic.

“The sooner you come, the shorter my remarks will be,” she said, later interrupting herself to check on the number of lawmakers in the chamber, calling: “Come on, my colleagues, to the gallery.”

Once debate concluded, Mr. Massie formally asked for a recorded vote, declaring, “I came here to make sure our republic doesn’t die by unanimous request in an empty chamber and request a recorded vote.”

But by that time, Ms. Pelosi, Mr. McCarthy and their top lieutenants had worked together to ensure that at least 216 lawmakers — a quorum — would be present to block the request. The bill cleared as lawmakers loudly registered their assent. Mr. Massie and a handful of others shouted “no!” just before the gavel fell.

Then the chamber erupted into applause.

Erica L. Green and Charlie Savage contributed reporting.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — The White House had been preparing to reveal on Wednesday a joint venture between General Motors and Ventec Life Systems that would allow for the production of as many as 80,000 desperately needed ventilators to respond to an escalating pandemic when word suddenly came down that the announcement was off.

The decision to cancel the announcement, government officials say, came after the Federal Emergency Management Agency said it needed more time to assess whether the estimated cost was prohibitive. That price tag was more than $1 billion, with several hundred million dollars to be paid upfront to General Motors to retool a car parts plant in Kokomo, Ind., where the ventilators would be made with Ventec’s technology.

Government officials said that the deal might still happen but that they are examining at least a dozen other proposals. And they contend that an initial promise that the joint venture could turn out 20,000 ventilators in short order had shrunk to 7,500, with even that number in doubt. Longtime emergency managers at FEMA are working with military officials to sort through the competing offers and federal procurement rules while under pressure to give President Trump something to announce.

But in an interview Thursday night with Sean Hannity, the president played down the need for ventilators.

“I don’t believe you need 40,000 or 30,000 ventilators,” he said, a reference to New York, where Gov. Andrew Cuomo has appealed for federal help in obtaining them. “You go into major hospitals sometimes, and they’ll have two ventilators. And now all of a sudden they’re saying, ‘Can we order 30,000 ventilators?’”

A General Motors spokesman said that “Project V,” as the ventilator program is known, was moving very fast, and a company official said “there’s no issue with retooling.”

A Ventec representative agreed.

“Ventec and G.M. have been working at breakneck speed to leverage our collective expertise in ventilation and manufacturing to meet the needs of the country as quickly as possible and arm medical professionals with the number of ventilators needed to save lives,” said Chris O. Brooks, Ventec’s chief strategy officer.

The only thing missing was clarity from the government about how many ventilators they needed — and who would be paid to build them.

The shortage of ventilators has emerged as one of the major criticisms of the Trump administration’s response to the coronavirus. The need to quickly equip hospitals across the country with tens of thousands more of the devices to treat those most seriously ill with the virus was not anticipated despite the Trump administration’s own projection in a simulation last year that millions of people could be hospitalized. And even now, the effort to produce them has been confused and disorganized.

At the center of the discussion about how to ramp up the production of ventilators is Jared Kushner, the president’s son-in-law and a senior White House aide, who has told people that he was called in two weeks ago by Vice President Mike Pence to produce more coronavirus test kits and who has now turned his attention to ventilators.

He has been directing officials at FEMA in the effort. Two officials said the suggestion to wait on the General Motors offer came from Col. Patrick Work, who is working at FEMA. Some government officials expressed concern about the possibility of ordering too many ventilators, leaving them with an expensive surplus.

As the agency has sorted through offers, trying to weigh production ability and costs, hospitals in New York and elsewhere are reporting a desperate need for more ventilators, which are critical in treating respiratory problems in a fast-rising tide of severe coronavirus cases.

A spokeswoman for FEMA said Colonel Work presented information on each contract in such meetings but did not make any recommendations. A White House spokesman declined to comment.

The involvement of General Motors was first floated this month as the carmaker’s factory floor in Kokomo was grinding to a halt and workers were being sent home — partly because the market was collapsing but also because workers would otherwise risk exposure to the coronavirus.

Last week, General Motors, Ventec Life Systems and a coalition of business executives called StopTheSpread.org issued a statement saying that Ventec would “leverage G.M.’s logistics, purchasing and manufacturing expertise to build more of their critically important ventilators,” including some portable units.

By Sunday, Mr. Trump appeared to suggest on Twitter that a deal had been completed to mass-produce the ventilators, even though it was unclear who would pay to equip the General Motors plant or how long that process would take.

“Ford, General Motors and Tesla are being given the go ahead to make ventilators and other metal products, FAST! @fema,” he wrote. “Go for it auto execs, lets see how good you are?”

Not for the first time has Mr. Trump jumped the gun.

Tesla officials had in fact met with engineers from the medical device company Medtronic in a separate negotiation, but no partnership has yet been announced. And while the chief executive of General Motors, Mary T. Barra, was enthused about the ventilator idea, Mr. Trump’s own aides had not embraced the G.M.-Ventec partnership — in part because they had not seen the specifics of the proposal.

Administration officials said Thursday that they were struggling to understand just how many ventilators the new venture could make.

The initial projection, one senior administration official said, was that after three weeks of preparation it could produce an initial run of 20,000 ventilators, or about two-thirds of what Gov. Andrew Cuomo of New York recently said his state alone needed to cover the influx of coronavirus patients expected in two weeks, if not sooner.

That number then shrank to 7,500 ventilators in the initial run, or maybe 5,000, an apparent recognition that auto transmissions and ventilators had very little in common. Those numbers are in flux and so are the Trump administration’s because the White House cannot decide how many ventilators it wants.

Targets have changed by the hour, officials said, as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Department of Health and Human Services, the Food and Drug Administration, which approves the use of medical devices, and the White House try to figure out how many ventilators to request and how much they should cost.

Those issues appeared to come to a head on Wednesday afternoon, when FEMA told the White House that it was premature to make a decision.

The $1.5 billion price tag comes to around $18,000 a ventilator. And the overall cost, by comparison, is roughly equal to buying 18 F-35s, the Pentagon’s most advanced fighter jet. 

So on Wednesday, despite the president’s tweet three days earlier, FEMA was still weighing competing offers in order to make a recommendation to Mr. Kushner. And it seemed clear to several officials that the agency would have to select multiple manufacturers, in part to avoid the risk that one production line runs into technical troubles, or that its workers contract the very virus the ventilators are being built to defeat.

David Sanger and Zolan Kanno-Youngs reported from Washington, and Maggie Haberman from New York. Ana Swanson contributed reporting from Washington.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — As China moves forward with expelling almost all American journalists from three major American newspapers, Trump administration officials have intensified discussions over whether to evict employees of Chinese media outlets who they say mainly act as spies.

The action is under consideration because some U.S. officials want to retaliate against China in a new conflict that has revolved around news organizations and is being fueled by hostility over the coronavirus pandemic.

Since the virus began spreading across the United States, Washington and Beijing have waged a global information war over the outbreak. President Trump and his aides are trying to pin responsibility on China, where Communist Party officials initially covered up the dangers of the virus as it was first discovered. Mr. Trump, though, has been criticized for vast failures in the American response.

Some American intelligence officials have pushed for years to expel employees of Chinese media organizations who they say mainly file intelligence reports. The officials now see an opening to make a strong case after Beijing abruptly announced this month that it would expel almost all American citizens who report from mainland China for The New York Times, The Washington Post and The Wall Street Journal.

China also demanded those organizations, as well as Voice of America and Time magazine, turn over information on employees, budgets, assets and other operational details.

American officials view the state-run outlets in China as a potent threat in the growing strategic rivalry between the two superpowers, both because the outlets disseminate propaganda around the world and because of their ability to provide cover for intelligence operatives.

“Propaganda outlets that report to the Chinese Communist Party are foreign agents, not ‘journalists,’” the State Department spokeswoman, Morgan Ortagus, said on Twitter on Thursday.

“Even General Secretary Xi says they ‘must speak for the Party,’” she added, referring to remarks that President Xi Jinping of China made in 2016 as he toured the headquarters of state-run media organizations. In recent days, Ms. Ortagus and Hua Chunying, a spokeswoman for the Chinese Foreign Ministry, have engaged in an information duel on Twitter.

Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has insisted on using the term “Wuhan virus” to refer to the coronavirus, which ignited tensions at an online meeting Wednesday of foreign ministers of the Group of 7 nations. Mr. Trump has used the term “Chinese virus” despite widespread criticism that the label is racist and encourages attacks on Asian-Americans. Meanwhile, a spokesman for the Chinese Foreign Ministry, Zhao Lijian, has pushed the conspiracy theory that the U.S. Army might have taken the virus to Wuhan, where the pandemic began.

Against that backdrop, some American officials want to move quickly against Chinese intelligence operatives. American counterintelligence officials have more closely scrutinized the work of Chinese diplomats, journalists, scientists and others in the United States, though some critics have denounced this as a new “red scare.” In September, the United States secretly expelled two employees of the Chinese Embassy in Washington who had been caught driving on a sensitive military base in Virginia with their wives; it appeared to be the first expulsion of Chinese diplomats accused of espionage in more than 30 years.

Any expulsion of Chinese employees at media outlets accused of conducting intelligence work could include ones based at the United Nations, where China has a permanent seat on the Security Council, according to an intelligence official familiar with the plans. Most Chinese employees of state-run organizations work in Washington for large organizations.

Some Chinese intelligence operatives pose as journalists at those agencies and at smaller state-run outlets, using “nonofficial cover,” in the parlance of spies, experts on Chinese espionage say. Some American officials have spoken of entirely shutting down those small outfits as well as any Chinese organization or company accused of being a front for intelligence work.

American officials declined to estimate the number of Chinese intelligence operatives in the United States they say use journalism employment as a cover or the number they would like to expel.

The F.B.I. referred questions to the State Department, which said it does not comment on intelligence matters. The Chinese Embassy did not reply to a request for comment.

American intelligence officials have long asserted that many Chinese journalists abroad play a hybrid role in which they not only provide reports for publications and broadcasters in China, but also give information to Beijing’s intelligence apparatus.

The action now under consideration would try to avoid evicting most of those who play a hybrid role and focus more on people the U.S. government believes are mainly spies, according to intelligence officials. The journalistic reports filed by those Chinese citizens are simply a screen for covertly collecting intelligence, the officials said.

The United States is scrutinizing most closely China Central Television, the main state-run network that has extensive operations overseas, the intelligence official said. It has an arm, China Global Television Network, that runs its own operations and broadcasts in foreign languages.

The main Chinese overseas spy agency, the Ministry of State Security, has operatives at various media outlets, say intelligence officials and experts on Chinese espionage. The People’s Liberation Army also has intelligence operatives overseas with media cover.

American officials were infuriated by China’s announcement of the new wave of expulsions of American journalists, who are not spies. The officials saw the action as part of Beijing’s attempts to censor reporting about the government’s missteps over the coronavirus outbreak.

The officials are now seeking a way to retaliate beyond continuing a cycle of retribution that harms people who practice actual journalism. Taking the fight to the intelligence services would do that, they say, as well as allowing the Americans to avoid criticism that they are clamping down on press freedoms.

One option that some officials have discussed that does not involve spies is limiting the reach and distribution of the Chinese outlets in the United States, whether those are television networks or newspapers. But that runs into the thorny issue of press freedoms. For years, the Chinese government has blocked online access to major foreign news websites and apps, and it often censors broadcasts by international television networks.

The wave of expulsions of journalists in the two countries began when China announced on Feb. 19 it would evict three Wall Street Journal reporters, the first outright expulsions of foreign journalists since 1998.

After that announcement, which came a day after the Trump administration imposed new rules on five Chinese state-run media organizations, American officials grappled with how to respond. Some raised the idea of expelling Chinese state media employees who did intelligence work. Matthew Pottinger, the deputy national security adviser and a former Wall Street Journal reporter based in China, led a meeting on Feb. 24 to discuss options.

The administration announced on March 2 it was issuing new visa quotas on Chinese citizens working at five Chinese media organizations. In total, they could employ only 100 Chinese citizens in their American operations. That would result in the de facto expulsion of about 60.

A senior State Department official said last week that the “Chinese government” had met a deadline of March 13 to identify employees who would remain at the organizations. It was unlikely that Chinese officials had selected intelligence operatives to send back to China, American officials said.

China retaliated against the new quotas by expelling journalists at The Times, The Journal and The Post, affecting at least 13 Americans, even though those newspapers are not tied to the U.S. government.

“Did they really believe they can silence a country like China without any consequences?” Hua Chunying, a Foreign Ministry spokeswoman, wrote on Twitter on Tuesday.

“China clearly no longer sees Western journalists as useful or critical to getting its message out,” said Daniel M. Kliman, a senior fellow at the Center for a New American Security and a former Asia policy official in the Pentagon. “With the expansion of state-run organizations globally, it seems they don’t need Western journalists around.”

On Tuesday, the publishers of the three newspapers issued an open letter to China.

The decision by Beijing to expel the journalists during a pandemic, they said, was “uniquely damaging and reckless as the world continues the struggle to control this disease, a struggle that will require the free flow of reliable news and information.”

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — Of the 75 senior positions at the Department of Homeland Security, 20 are either vacant or filled by acting officials, including Chad F. Wolf, the acting secretary who recently was unable to tell a Senate committee how many respirators and protective face masks were available in the United States.

The National Park Service, which like many federal agencies is full of vacancies in key posts, tried this week to fill the job of a director for the national capital region after hordes of visitors flocked to see the cherry blossoms near the National Mall, creating a potential public health hazard as the coronavirus continues to spread.

At the Department of Veterans Affairs, workers are scrambling to order medical supplies on Amazon after its leaders, lacking experience in disaster responses, failed to prepare for the onslaught of patients at its medical centers.

Ever since President Trump came into office, a record high turnover and unfilled jobs have emptied offices across wide sections of the federal bureaucracy. Now, current and former administration officials and disaster experts say the coronavirus has exposed those failings as never before and left parts of the federal government unprepared and ill equipped for what may be the largest public health crisis in a century.

Some 80 percent of the senior positions in the White House below the cabinet level have turned over during Mr. Trump’s administration, with about 500 people having departed since the inauguration. Mr. Trump is on his fourth chief of staff, his fourth national security adviser and his fifth secretary of the Department of Homeland Security.

Between Mr. Trump’s history of firing people and the choice by many career officials and political appointees to leave, he now finds himself with a government riddled with vacancies, acting department chiefs and, in some cases, leaders whose professional backgrounds do not easily match up to the task of managing a pandemic.

“Right now for the life of me, I don’t know who speaks for D.H.S.,” said Janet Napolitano, a secretary of homeland security under President Barack Obama. “Having nonacting leadership, and I think having consistency in your leadership team and the accumulation of experience, really matters. And I think it would be fair to say the current administration hasn’t sustained that.”

One example is the Department of Veterans Affairs, which is legally meant to back up the nation’s health care system in an emergency. On Thursday, the Office of Inspector General at the department released a report detailing red flags in its preparedness for the crisis.

The secretary, Robert L. Wilkie, has no experience in emergency management, and he has been largely absent from public briefings with senior officials on the pandemic. “Secretary Wilkie has attended 20 coronavirus task force meetings since he joined the task force on March 3,” said Christina Mandreucci, a spokeswoman for the department. Mr. Wilkie recently fired his second in command, who had worked in past disasters, and his head of emergency preparedness retired.

Senior officials in the department say they are kept out of the loop on major decisions, such as whether it will continue Mr. Trump’s preferred policy of sending veterans into the community for care, and learn from the news media about how centers are interpreting guidelines.

Many of the newcomers in agencies lack relationships with the private sector and lawmakers to accomplish basic goals.

One high-profile case came with eliminating a directorate at the White House’s National Security Council that was charged with pandemic preparations. In 2018, John R. Bolton, then Mr. Trump’s national security adviser, ousted Thomas P. Bossert, Mr. Trump’s homeland security adviser and longtime disaster expert. The directorate was folded into an office dedicated to weapons of mass destruction.

Equally notable may have been the resignation last year of Scott Gottlieb, the commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, who was an early advocate for broad coronavirus testing and stronger mitigation policies. He was succeeded by Dr. Stephen M. Hahn, a noted oncologist, who has struggled during Senate hearings to explain some of his positions. The agency is largely viewed as slow in engaging the private sector to develop tests for the coronavirus. Many members of Mr. Gottlieb’s team departed with him, leaving the agency with many people new to their jobs.

The Department of Homeland Security, the agency tasked with screening at airports and carrying out the travel restrictions that were Mr. Trump’s first major action to combat the coronavirus, is full of vacancies. Of the 75 senior positions listed on the department’s website, 20 are either vacant or filled by acting officials.

Mr. Wolf is the acting homeland security secretary, and Kenneth T. Cuccinelli II, a representative on the coronavirus task force, is the department’s acting deputy secretary. The deputy administrators of the Transportation Security Administration and Federal Emergency Management Agency also serve in acting capacities. A federal judge also ruled that the process the Trump administration used to bring Mr. Cuccinelli to the department violated a federal vacancies law that stipulates open leadership positions must go to certain officials.

Mr. Wolf is familiar with airport security operations. He was part of the team that established the Transportation Security Administration and later served as the agency’s chief of staff. But the chaotic introduction of Mr. Trump’s travel restrictions this month against European countries struggling with the pandemic exemplified the erratic structure at the top of the department and the agencies it oversees, said Gil Kerlikowske, a former commissioner of Customs and Border Protection.

Mr. Kerlikowske said relationships with executives at airlines and at the airports were imperative. “The lack of experience and knowledge is kind of telling,” he said.

A spokeswoman for homeland security, Sofia Boza-Holman, said such criticism of the department was unwarranted. “That’s absolutely absurd,” she said. “D.H.S.’s leaders have been at the forefront in helping contain the Covid-19 crisis. Thanks to President Trump’s leadership, D.H.S. has been able to respond wherever and whenever needed.”

Mr. Cuccinelli alarmed the public last month when he took to Twitter to complain that he did not have access to a Johns Hopkins University map of the virus’s spread, leading critics to wonder why Mr. Cuccinelli, a member of the coronavirus task force, needed outside data.

Mr. Wolf drew similar criticism from lawmakers when he failed to provide basic information on the coronavirus outbreak at a Senate appropriations hearing. “Mr. Secretary, you’re supposed to keep us safe,” said Senator John Kennedy, Republican of Louisiana. “You’re the secretary of homeland security and you can’t tell me if we have enough respirators.”

Mr. Wolf said the United States was “several months” away from getting a vaccine. “Your numbers aren’t the same as C.D.C.’s,” Mr. Kennedy said, referring to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Don’t you think you ought to contact them?”

Even National Park Service vacancies have taken a toll. The park service — which has its own police force — in recent days closed some parking lots near the Tidal Basin on the National Mall, where the cherry blossoms attract huge crowds each year, and urged people to stay away. Mayor Muriel Bowser stepped in and limited access to the area and sent police officers and members of the National Guard to enforce the shutdown.

As he juggles negotiations on Capitol Hill and introduces emergency lending programs with the Federal Reserve, Steven Mnuchin, the Treasury secretary, is scrambling to have enough officials in place to accommodate the additional workload stemming from four emergency lending programs, two new stimulus bills and a delayed Tax Day, even as departures are in store. The Treasury Department’s acting assistant secretary for international finance, Geoffrey Okamoto, is leaving to be the first deputy managing director of the International Monetary Fund, and Brian McGuire, the assistant secretary for legislative affairs, is departing.

Perhaps the biggest challenge facing the Treasury Department is the thin staffing at the Internal Revenue Service. The tax collection agency has faced deep cuts to its budget over the last decade, leaving some of its technology out of date.

Now the I.R.S. must cope with Tax Day being delayed by three months and a deluge of questions from confused taxpayers calling employees that are teleworking. The shortfall in staff is likely to be especially problematic as the Treasury Department tries to send stimulus money to Americans by using the I.R.S.’s taxpayer database to track them down.

Even the Pentagon, which is broadly viewed as better positioned than many other agencies for the pandemic response, is not immune. More than a third of all Senate-confirmed civilian positions at the Defense Department are vacant or filled by temporary officials, a peak level for the administration outside of the transition period, according to Pentagon statistics. Of 60 senior positions, 21 lack permanent appointees.

Senator Jack Reed of Rhode Island, the top Democrat on the Senate Armed Services Committee, criticized Defense Secretary Mark T. Esper and Gen. Mark A. Milley, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, this month about the imbalance. “These vacancies continue to challenge the department’s ability to effectively respond to national security challenges and undermine civilian inputs into the decision-making process,” Mr. Reed said.

Mick Mulvaney, who has served as Mr. Trump’s acting White House chief of staff since the beginning of 2019, was formally fired over Twitter on March 6, at the height of the coronavirus crisis.

Mr. Mulvaney has technically stayed on in his position, but since mid-March, he has been in self-isolation in South Carolina after announcing that he had been in contact with someone who had tested positive for the virus.

In previous administrations, the chief of staff has often played the key role in responding to crises.

Representative Mark Meadows of North Carolina, whom Mr. Trump announced as Mr. Mulvaney’s successor, has been seen at the White House in recent days, though he had not resigned from Congress.

Reporting was contributed by Alan Rappeport, Eric Lipton, Eric Schmitt, Michael D. Shear and Sheila Kaplan.

<|endoftext|>

Good morning and welcome to On Politics, a daily political analysis of the 2020 elections based on reporting by New York Times journalists.

Sign up here to get On Politics in your inbox every weekday.

The Senate finally passed its $2 trillion coronavirus stimulus bill late Wednesday night — putting the largest spending package in the country’s history on a cruise course to the president’s desk. The House is expected to approve it on Friday, and it could become law by the end of the week. But the bill isn’t without its detractors. Gov. Andrew Cuomo said it “would really be terrible for the State of New York.” A group of Republican senators objected to its expansion of jobless benefits, until Bernie Sanders threatened to hold it up in retaliation over what he called insufficient worker protections. And yet it ultimately passed 96 to 0, with the Senate agreeing that it was essential to keeping the economy afloat. The legislation beefs up unemployment compensation and offers loans and other forms of support to keep businesses open. Also notable: Its fine print is teeming with long-sought provisions for specific industries and interest groups — including a hotel-industry carveout that could benefit President Trump’s businesses.

As written, the bill is a mix of loans, payments and benefits. It contains small-business loans designed to keep employees on the payroll; one-time payments of $1,200 to many Americans; expanded unemployment benefits for a period of four months; $500 billion in funding for the Federal Reserve to use in a program of business grants, which administration officials say could bloom to $4 trillion through leveraging and investments; $100 billion toward medical care; and $150 billion to state antivirus efforts. 

Cuomo’s criticism of the bill comes from a calculation: His office said that based on a draft bill’s contents, New York State stands to receive roughly $3.8 billion in funding — far short of the up to $15 billion the governor says he needs to pay for coronavirus response efforts. New York has experienced the sharpest increase in confirmed cases of any state over the past week, and at more than 30,000 on Wednesday, it has by far the highest number confirmed over all.

Joe Biden’s main focus right now is competing for attention with Trump. The president’s daily news conferences give him a big microphone throughout this crisis, and these appearances are probably contributing to a bump in his approval ratings (no matter the veracity of his claims at them). But Biden also has to contend with Sanders, who has not dropped out of the Democratic primary race and is arguing for stronger government intervention for working people during the coronavirus outbreak. Once again, it seems that Sanders is ahead of Biden on message, even if he’s far behind him on voter support. Sanders’s campaign said he would welcome the opportunity to debate Biden again in April, but on Wednesday Biden said: Been there, done that. “I think we’ve had enough debates,” he told reporters from his home. “I think we should get on with this.”

Gov. Andrew Cuomo on Monday at the Javits Center in New York, where workers from the Federal Emergency Management Agency were constructing a makeshift hospital for coronavirus patients.

By Michael M. Grynbaum

President Trump’s briefings have become must-see TV. Some journalists and public health experts aren’t sure that’s a good thing.

Even by the standards of a crazy news cycle, the cable news ratings for the daily White House coronavirus briefing are eye-popping: 12.2 million people watched on CNN, Fox News and MSNBC on Monday, the kind of Nielsen stat usually reserved for prime-time football. Millions more tuned in via ABC, CBS, NBC and online streams.

The concern is that Mr. Trump’s misleading and sometimes false remarks are being beamed unfiltered to a mass audience. “Training a camera on a live event, and just letting it play out, is technology, not journalism; journalism requires editing and context,” the veteran anchor Ted Koppel told me.

Mr. Trump’s supporters say news networks should not be in the business of preventing the public from seeing their president speak during the crisis, and TV executives tend to agree. With occasional exceptions, the major networks continue to carry the briefings live.

And the TV viewership may continue to rise as millions more Americans are instructed to remain in their homes indefinitely.



On Politics is also available as a newsletter. Sign up here to get it delivered to your inbox.

Is there anything you think we’re missing? Anything you want to see more of? We’d love to hear from you. Email us at onpolitics@nytimes.com.

<|endoftext|>

Hi. Welcome to On Politics, your guide to the day in national politics. I’m Lisa Lerer, your host.

Sign up here to get On Politics in your inbox every weekday.

During the Great Recession, with the economy in free fall, Congress rushed to pass the largest bailout and stimulus measures in American history. Those decisions helped stabilize the American economy but shook up the political landscape, birthing the conservative Tea Party movement and revitalizing progressive politics.

The $2 trillion economic stabilization package expected to be finalized this week makes the $700 billion Wall Street bailout in 2008 and the $800 billion stimulus bill in 2009 look like pocket change.

Like the Great Recession, this current national crisis could have political implications that reverberate far longer than the public health and economic impacts. Activists on both the right and the left say this mind-boggling amount of government spending could rewire our politics, perhaps in extraordinary ways.

“This crisis is exposing a lot of problems and vulnerabilities and injustices,” said Sarah Miller, head of the American Economic Liberties Project, a new organization dedicated to pushing government to confront corporate power. “Now, this bill is really laying them out into the sunshine for the public.”

For critics of the legislation, the devil is in the details. Sure, the bill includes something for everyone: loans and grants for corporations and small businesses, increased unemployment benefits for workers who are laid off or working fewer hours, and direct payments of $1,200 per adult and $500 per child for low- and middle-income individuals and families.

But the biggest portion of spending — more than $500 billion — goes to large corporations and industries. Provisions include $32 billion for the airline industry, $17 billion for “businesses critical to maintaining national security”— a category seen as intended at least partly for Boeing — and a tweak to federal tax law sought by restaurants and retailers that could save their industries $15 billion a year.

Some companies owned by the family of President Trump’s son-in-law and White House adviser, Jared Kushner, could benefit. And despite Democratic efforts, Mr. Trump’s companies would not be prohibited from benefiting from some elements of the bill.

And that may be only the first round of spending.

“Everything about this is deeply concerning,” said Jenny Beth Martin, a co-founder of one of the first Tea Party organizations, the Tea Party Patriots. “There are going to be so many unintended consequences from the month of March 2020. It will be years before we sort out what just happened.”

Yet, for Tea Party supporters like Ms. Martin, the situation is complicated. For years, they excoriated big government, helping to elect a new class of lawmakers determined to slash spending.

That is, until Mr. Trump took office.

Mr. Trump’s incoming chief of staff, Mark Meadows, and his departing acting chief of staff, Mick Mulvaney, both tied their congressional careers to the Tea Party movement. Now, Mr. Mulvaney, Mr. Meadows and other Tea Party politicians are top supporters of the administration — and of the record-breaking level of spending pushed by the White House, even before the coronavirus crisis.

All have been cautious not to use the B-word (bailout) or even the S-word (stimulus) when it comes to describing the economic stabilization package.

Tim Phillips, president of Americans for Prosperity, a group that helped fund and organize Tea Party activists, drew a firm distinction between the 2008 bailout and today’s package.

“This is very different than in 2008-2009, which was an abject cronyistic bailout,” said Mr. Phillips, who said he had discussed the package on town-hall-style events conducted via telephone with thousands of his group’s supporters. “The American public gets that this is a very different situation. It affects almost everyone.”

That position may be hard to maintain if the money becomes, as critics fear, a “slush fund” for big corporations. Senate Democrats successfully maneuvered to include more oversight and transparency in the legislation, but how the Treasury Department handles the distribution of the funds will be closely watched, particularly as average Americans struggle to survive the crisis.

During the previous administration, the Wall Street bailout came to be associated with President Barack Obama even though it was passed under his predecessor. Some liberal activists unhappy with the program were reluctant to drive their economic message against a president popular with progressives.

They will face no such hesitation this time around, with Mr. Trump’s administration providing an easy foil and prominent leaders of the movement — like Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York — already making their case.

“We see this giant slush fund that Steven Mnuchin has a lot of authority over with limited strings attached,” Ms. Miller said, referring to the Treasury secretary. “This was a bill that fundamentally restructures our economy, and while it does provide some critical help, it also is going to exacerbate these massive imbalances of economic power.”

By Nick Corasaniti

Super PACs supporting Democrats have clearly struck a nerve with their ads on the Trump administration’s response to the coronavirus.

In Tuesday’s newsletter, we took a look at the roughly $12 million being spent by Democratic outside groups attacking President Trump for his comments this year playing down the severity of the coronavirus outbreak. One particularly stark ad came from Priorities USA, a major Democratic super PAC, showing the exponential curve of coronavirus cases trending upward as Mr. Trump’s voice is heard saying that “this is their new hoax” and that “we have it totally under control.”

On Wednesday, the Trump campaign sent a cease-and-desist letter to television stations across the country, telling them to stop airing the ad from Priorities USA because it contained false representations of Mr. Trump’s remarks, particularly the word “hoax.” The president and his supporters have said that he was referring to Democrats’ criticism of his response to the virus, not to the virus itself.

In response, officials at Priorities USA announced today that they were expanding their ad buy, effectively thumbing their noses at the Trump campaign by spending $600,000 to air the ad in Arizona. The group previously announced it would spend $6 million to run the ad in Pennsylvania, Michigan, Wisconsin and Florida.

“The fact that Trump is going to such great lengths to keep the American people from hearing his own words adds to the urgency of communicating them far and wide,” said Guy Cecil, the chairman of Priorities USA, in a statement announcing the new ad buy in Arizona. “Trump doesn’t want voters to know the truth. We will not be intimidated.”

The “hoax” remark, which was also featured in an ad by Unite the Country, a super PAC supporting Joe Biden, led Fox News to decline to air it, as we reported in yesterday’s newsletter.

Drop us a line!

In my house, I’m suddenly an elementary schoolteacher, a chef and a sanitization specialist. (P.S.: I’m not great at any of it.)

How has the virus changed the dynamics in your family life? Is Dad taking charge of bath time, after years of declining to take the lead? Is all the distance learning falling to Mom — and she’s getting awfully tired of it?

Tell us your stories at onpolitics@nytimes.com. Don’t forget to include your name and location. We can’t wait to hear from you!

Need inspiration? One of our colleagues interviewed Shiri Kenigsberg Levi, the Israeli mother whose rant over distance learning went viral.

The $2 trillion economic stabilization package is intended to mitigate the economic consequences of shutting down the economy. As Times columnist Bret Stephens told Gail Collins in The Conversation, a huge government intervention is what’s needed now.

“The biggest challenge right now is to keep people and businesses liquid, lest they go bankrupt,” Stephens said. “Millions of people are being shut out from their jobs. Businesses across the country are being shut out from their customers. All through no fault of their own, and all on account of government orders. So there’s a moral obligation as well as an economic necessity.”

But President Trump is seeking an early return to business as usual to jolt an economic recovery. The Editorial Board argues that, “as the president’s own health advisers warn, the worst of the coronavirus pandemic is yet to come,” and that “it’s time for a national lockdown.” In other words, easing restrictions now would cost lives for the sake of potential economic gain. This trade-off, though, may not be quite what it seems.

Times columnist Jamelle Bouie says that the Trump administration has convinced itself “that an extended lockdown is more harmful than anything the virus can do.” Bouie concludes: “Trump will sacrifice Americans to coronavirus if it will save the market and his prospects for re-election.”

— Adam Rubenstein

Donuts Delite, in Rochester, N.Y., is selling out of doughnuts featuring the likeness of Dr. Anthony Fauci. The Democrat & Chronicle reports:

Decorating the specialty treats involves printing an image of 79-year-old Fauci on wafer-thin edible paper and placing the paper on top of a thick layer of buttercream frosting. Fauci’s image is then encircled with piped frosting decorated with red, white and blue sprinkles.

My question: Does the shop deliver? Clearly, this is a crisis that calls for C.D.C. intervention … and some serious carbs.

Thanks for reading. On Politics is your guide to the political news cycle, delivering clarity from the chaos.

On Politics is also available as a newsletter. Sign up here to get it delivered to your inbox.

Is there anything you think we’re missing? Anything you want to see more of? We’d love to hear from you. Email us at onpolitics@nytimes.com.

<|endoftext|>

Both hands were waving — over here, over there, a full wingspan on display — as Bernie Sanders directed his most biting sarcasm at his “Republican friends.”

Excuse him, forgive him, for wanting working people to get a few more bucks for a few more months as part of the sweeping stimulus bill that was being debated on the Senate floor. Excuse him, forgive him, for not wanting “to punish the poor and working people” struggling to weather the economic meltdown caused by the coronavirus pandemic.

“My Republican colleagues are very distressed,” he said late Wednesday.

“Oh my God, the universe is collapsing!” he said so passionately that he nearly spat. “Oh my word, will the universe survive?!”

With the virus bringing the nation to a virtual stop, there is no real presidential campaign for Mr. Sanders to engage in, and even if there were, he is almost hopelessly behind Joseph R. Biden Jr. in the delegate count. Many Democrats and even some allies have said it is time for him to bow out — or at minimum articulate publicly why he wants to remain in the race.

But Mr. Sanders is still running, in large part, allies and aides say, because he believes he can meld this moment of national crisis with the progressive policy agenda that has been his life’s work.

“For someone who has built a career out of campaigning against the inequality of our health care system, this is prime time,” said Nick Carter, who served as political outreach director for the 2016 Sanders campaign.

So Mr. Sanders will take the stage when he can get it — including on the Senate floor Wednesday night, but also in news releases, radio and television interviews and live streams where he studiously repeats his mantra to loyalists who once crowded Iowa auditoriums to cheer him but now must settle for sometimes technologically challenged digital presentations.

It is unclear who exactly is listening or whether he can make a difference. Even Mr. Biden, as the likely Democratic nominee to face President Trump, has struggled to get visibility. Both candidates are being overshadowed by daily briefings from Mr. Trump and Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York.

In an interview on Thursday with the radio program “1A,” Mr. Sanders did not say how long he intended to stay in the race but suggested he was not going anywhere soon. And he rebuffed a comparison to his 2016 campaign, when he fought Hillary Clinton to the bitter end, arguing that the coronavirus made the two situations different because many states this year had postponed their primaries.

“You’re talking about an election without elections,” he said. “What does that mean? It’s kind of unprecedented.”

His campaign says he is still actively running for president, and there is other concrete evidence he is. On Tuesday, his team confirmed that he planned to participate in an April debate with Mr. Biden if there is one. The Bern app, a proprietary smartphone app that the campaign uses to organize volunteers, still includes an option for supporters to send their networks a text message encouraging them to mail in ballots, according to an aide. Under phone bank event listings on his campaign website, volunteers are urged to “join campaign staff as we outreach our communities.”

But his campaign is not actively advertising on Facebook and has not made any significant television ad buys since March 12. He has not actively fund-raised for his campaign in over a week, though his campaign has used its extensive email list to raise money for charities to help people during the virus crisis. On Wednesday, his campaign sent an email to supporters asking them to sign a petition to help Amazon workers.

Some Democratic supporters of his have said it’s time to end his campaign, including Robert Reich, the former labor secretary. Other Democrats say that if he stays in, he should make clear his motivation and his goal.

“I’ve never seen Bernie as someone who is selfish, I’ve always thought of him as being an advocate for his cause,” Jay Jacobs, the chairman of the New York State Democratic Party, said in an interview. “If he stays in the race for no reason, that would be selfish.”

In conversations with aides and allies since March 17 — when stinging losses in three states left him with no realistic chance at winning the Democratic nomination — many said he viewed this as an extraordinary moment that not only demands the kind of political revolution he has championed since he was the mayor of Burlington, Vt., but also underscores why the country would have been better off if his liberal policy agenda was already in place.

Mr. Sanders has appeared eager to put himself front and center for his supporters, holding live stream events on the virus nearly every night and pushing out a long list of policy proposals to handle the outbreak that included providing every American with a check for $2,000 a month.

In a sign of his political influence, he threatened on Wednesday afternoon to hold up the economic stimulus bill if Republicans continued to fight unemployment benefits that they feared would be larger than some people’s wages — the reason for his sarcastic denunciations in the Senate chamber.

“While we do our best to address these crises, it is extremely important that we try to understand how we got to where we are today, and the need to bring about fundamental reform of American society,” Mr. Sanders said during a live stream event on Wednesday night, after running viewers through major elements of the stimulus bill.

Many of his supporters are still holding out faint hope that he can win the nomination, arguing that the coronavirus outbreak has made even unlikely scenarios possible. Already, many states have pushed their primaries back to June 2, making it impossible for Mr. Biden to clinch the nomination before then. There are murmurs among some allies that Mr. Sanders intends to stay in at least until the primary in New York, which is scheduled for April 28 but could be pushed back to June 23.

Some want him to stay in the race indefinitely because his candidacy provides him the megaphone to shape the narrative of the progressive agenda, and will give him leverage as he seeks policy concessions from Mr. Biden and influence over the party’s platform.

Some close to him suggested that his coronavirus outreach was a way to keep his supporters motivated and engaged during this strange time of suspended animation, so that the campaign can jump-start them into action if he decides to rev his candidacy back up.

His detractors, however, point out that he has chosen to hold his own events and speak to his own supporters but until Wednesday had largely left the congressional proceedings to others — including his former rival Senator Elizabeth Warren, who was active in helping to shape the rescue bill. On Sunday, when fellow Senate Democrats blocked an action on the bill that delayed progress, he skipped the vote, instead remaining in Burlington to air a live stream with Representatives Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, Ilhan Omar and Rashida Tlaib.

Some aides said he chose not to fly to Washington for the vote because its outcome was never in doubt. But others close to him professed confusion that he had passed up even a symbolic opportunity to offer his voice in the midst of a national emergency.

As Mr. Sanders continues to mull his campaign’s future, few aides are willing to so much as speculate what he will decide to do. When he returned to Burlington last week, none of his closest advisers went with him. Neither Jeff Weaver, a top adviser, nor his campaign manager, Faiz Shakir, has responded to interview requests for days.

“I’m officially declining to comment,” Mr. Shakir said in a text message on Thursday. “Feel free to use that if you’d like.”

Mr. Sanders, in the meantime, has said more than once — including during Thursday’s radio interview — that he is winning the generational and ideological debate. And he seems ready to carry the debate forward. Only he knows for how long.

Stephanie Saul and Nick Corasaniti contributed reporting.

<|endoftext|>

The urgent update from the Peace Corps landed abruptly in the email inboxes of volunteers on March 15: It was time to evacuate.

Miguel Garcia, a 27-year-old volunteer leader for the corps in the Dominican Republic, had just reassured someone that the corps would be staying on the job. With a sinking heart, he read the detailed instructions three times.

The tears would come later. Now he had a job to do.

He had 24 hours to get 32 volunteers scattered across the country to Santo Domingo, the capital. Several of his volunteers were about eight hours away in hard-to-reach communities near the border, with limited internet and cell service.

“Panic took over, and I was just mindlessly doing things,” Mr. Garcia said. “It wasn’t until I came home to an apartment that needed to be packed that it all hit me. I showered in cold water for about 45 minutes and cried, overwhelmed by all of the people I needed to communicate with and say goodbye to.”

For the first time in its nearly 60-year history, the Peace Corps had temporarily suspended its operations, evacuating more than 7,000 volunteers from posts in more than 60 countries because of the coronavirus pandemic. An independent agency of the U.S. government created by President Kennedy in 1961, the corps sends volunteers abroad to help with social and economic development projects. They dig wells, teach in schools and train people in everything from sewing to healthy breastfeeding.

In an open letter, Jody Olsen, the director of the Peace Corps, said the move was meant to protect volunteers and prevent them from being stranded during the pandemic. Within hours, volunteers were packing their bags, saying their farewells and rushing to designated meeting places as airlines canceled flights and countries began closing borders.

It was a crushing blow for a group of idealistic Americans, mostly young people who had postponed careers and graduate school to promote the lofty goal of “world peace and friendship.” Their average age is 26, although some are retirees older than 50. The hardest part, some said, was fleeing before they could help their communities prepare for the pandemic.

In interviews, a handful of volunteers described shock, confusion and heartbreak as they arrived back home in the United States, jobless in the middle of growing outbreak and economic shutdown. All were asked to quarantine themselves.

“The situation in Morocco went so fast,” said Elizabeth Burke, 54, who had been in the country for less than a year, teaching English and working at a sewing cooperative. “It went from Moroccans not being aware of the coronavirus and what was going on to a complete shutdown. Hours after we left, all cafes and restaurants had closed.” The cooperative is now sewing masks for health-care workers, she said.

Hailey Hall, 26, had spent nearly two years in Zambia. “None of us saw it ending this way,” she said. “It was a shock. Everything happened so quickly, but I think people understood why this had to happen.”

With more than 400 volunteers and trainees, Zambia had the largest number of Peace Corps volunteers, she said. “I had a friend in a northwestern province, which is a two- to three-day journey by public taxi and bus,” Ms. Hall said. “The worst part was the way people had to say goodbye so quickly. It was heartbreaking.”

After nearly two years in the Philippines, Ashley Vetter, 26, gave away a lot of her belongings, found a new home for her dog and said goodbye to the teachers she had worked with — all within 24 hours — before hopping on a 13-hour bus ride to get to Manila on time.

“I couldn’t really wrap my mind around the fact that I was leaving for good,” Ms. Vetter said.

She had to leave in the middle of a big project: Her high school students were building wells to provide fresh water for their community, essential for hand washing and other good hygiene to fight Covid-19 and other diseases. After she arrived home in the United States, the teenagers sent her photos: They had finished the wells.

When the email reached P.J. Gibson, 22, in Tanzania, he had been teaching physics at a secondary school for about nine months. There were no reported coronavirus infections there, so he was hopeful. “My idea was that I would stay in the country until I was physically removed,” he said.

His students were upset and asked why he was leaving for a country with more coronavirus cases. Mr. Gibson said he had no answers for them. “My students were the hardest group to say goodbye to,” he said. “At one point, I had to go home during the day because I couldn’t hold myself together.”

Despite the hurried retreat, volunteers said the Peace Corps was supportive, helping to book last-minute flights, telling them how to stay safe from the virus and paying for alternative lodging if volunteers couldn’t self-quarantine with U.S. relatives considered high risk.

“I feel like they did a good job of making the best of a really horrible situation,” Mr. Gibson said.

Glenn Blumhorst, the president and chief executive of the National Peace Corps Association, a nonprofit organization for former volunteers, said the evacuation was prudent. The agency has evacuated specific regions in the past, such as for the 2014 Ebola outbreak in West Africa, but never all of the posts at once, Mr. Blumhorst said.

“We need to salute these individuals. They’re the ambassadors of our country around the world and represent the best of America,” he added. “They’re coming home as heroes, and we need to support them as a community and a country.”

Peace Corps volunteers typically serve for two years, after three months of training. The evacuees will still receive some compensation, $4,500 for those who served less than a year and $9,000 for those who served less than two years, with two months of health coverage, the corps said. They also have preference for federal jobs.

The evacuated volunteers described a surreal return — a moment that was supposed to feel celebratory was made somber. Many worried about exposing their family members to the coronavirus after long legs of travel, and did not know how they’d adjust to a country vastly different from the one they left.

QueenEsther Adu, 25, said the airport in Washington, D.C., was empty and her flight back to Columbus, Ohio, was even emptier. She hadn’t thought about the coronavirus much while serving as a health volunteer in Senegal, where she had been for more than two years, and was surprised at how serious the pandemic had become, she said.

Returning to the United States has always been a culture shock for Peace Corps volunteers, who often prepare for it over a couple of months. It can be shocking, for example, to walk into an American supermarket or a Costco laden with products after years in a poorer country. Mr. Gibson said the adjustment was particularly hard, returning to empty streets and home isolation.

The Peace Corps community in the United States, which includes more than 200,000 former volunteers, has been supportive, offering to open their homes, and provide food and advice if needed, Ms. Vetter said.

When she arrived in Minneapolis after her lengthy journey from Manila, her mother met her at the airport but stood a good distance away. Ms. Vetter then drove to a hotel, paid for by the Peace Corps, to self-quarantine away from her father, who is considered high risk.

“That was the hardest part,” Ms. Vetter said. “Seeing your mom after two years and being so close but not being able to give her a hug. We both cried a lot.”

<|endoftext|>

An Arizona man died and his wife was hospitalized after officials said they treated themselves on Sunday with a deadly home remedy for the new coronavirus — a popular fish tank additive that has the same active ingredient as an anti-malaria drug. 

The drug, known as chloroquine phosphate or chloroquine, has been bandied about by President Trump during White House briefings on the coronavirus pandemic as a potential “game changer” in the treatment of Covid-19.

The couple, who officials at Banner Health, a hospital system based in Phoenix, said were in their 60s and were from Maricopa County, quickly experienced side effects that included nausea and vomiting. They were not tested for the coronavirus.

The man died from cardiac arrest and his wife was initially listed in critical condition, according to hospital officials, who said on Monday that the woman had been upgraded to stable condition and was expected to make a full recovery. Their names were not released.

Dr. Daniel Brooks, medical director of the Banner Poison and Drug Information Center, said in an interview on Monday night that the couple’s attempt to self-medicate was a cautionary tale. 

“It’s incredibly dangerous and foolish for people to be doing this,” he said. “This is not going to be a magic pill for us to get us through this.”

Dr. Brooks said the couple had read about chloroquine phosphate on the internet, which he said was cluttered with a lot of misinformation about treatments for Covid-19, the disease caused by the new coronavirus. He said the public should rely on authoritative sources such as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the World Health Organization and state health officials for medical advice — not the internet or politicians. 

“You need to listen to the scientists,” he said. “People are panicking and making decisions based on symptoms without being tested.”

The woman told NBC News on Monday that she had heard Mr. Trump make repeated mentions of chloroquine during recent White House briefings on the coronavirus and that she used chloroquine phosphate to treat her koi fish.

“I saw it sitting on the back shelf and thought, ‘Hey, isn’t that the stuff they’re talking about on TV,’ ” said the woman, who was not named by NBC.

The White House did not immediately respond to a request for comment on Monday night.

During a briefing on Friday, Mr. Trump suggested that two long-used malaria drugs, chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine, could be effective in the treatment of the coronavirus. The drugs are being tested in clinical trials.

At the same news conference, Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases since 1984, said there had been only anecdotal evidence that the drugs may be effective. As of yet, no drugs have been approved in the United States for the treatment of the coronavirus.

In Nigeria, health officials recently reported some episodes of hospitals treating patients for chloroquine poisoning.

The fish tank additive is used to eliminate algae and to treat the white spot condition commonly known as ich. On eBay, prices for the additive have spiked during the coronavirus pandemic. 

Dr. Brooks said 85 percent of people who get the coronavirus don’t need medical treatment. As of Tuesday morning, the coronavirus had a fatality rate of about 1.2 percent in the United States, according to health officials. Dr. Brooks said antiviral medications were used only in patients who had tested positive and are critically ill. The medications need to be closely monitored because they can have serious side effects, he said. 





<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — The Army earlier this week ordered a halt to most training, exercises and nonessential activities that require troops to be in close contact, military officials said, but abruptly reversed itself days later even as the infection rate within the American military shot up.

The move, by the largest branch in the U.S. military, would have been the most sweeping effort by any of the armed services to stave off the spread of coronavirus as the Defense Department comes to grip with an illness that has paralyzed plans and missions as the world faces a health crisis not seen in a century.

Rescinding the order sparked confusion among the ranks and with commanders. A Defense Department tally on Thursday reported that cases of coronavirus recorded by the Pentagon had hit 600, more than doubling in three days.

Defense Secretary Mark T. Esper has insisted that the armed forces find a way to both protect troops from the rampaging virus while still performing the military’s essential operations.

“I’m fully confident that we will remain prepared to conduct all of our missions,” Mr. Esper said during a town hall-style meeting on Tuesday at the Pentagon.

Around the world, military planners are wrestling with a litany of issues. One problem is that far-flung bases in hot spots lack resources to care for potential coronavirus patients and to carry out quarantine procedures.

At Camp Lemonnier in Djibouti, the largest U.S. base on the African continent, with 3,000 troops, an older Defense Department contractor was thought to have the virus, according to one military official. But Camp Lemonnier has a limited supply of ventilators configured to help coronavirus patients.

These concerns have forced Pentagon officials to examine how to transport coronavirus patients without exposing the aircrew, since only a handful of aircraft are equipped to move such patients around. The contractor was evacuated to Germany and has subsequently tested positive for the virus.

On Wednesday, Mr. Esper issued an order stopping all U.S. military travel worldwide for 60 days, with some exceptions, such as the ongoing troop withdrawal from Afghanistan. Reuters first reported the development.

But the order, which essentially freezes troops in place for the next two months, will undoubtedly have consequences, as troops’ missions are extended well past their return date, and the military-wide deployment calendar, set months in advances, is thrown off kilter as training atrophies and certifications for military qualifications expire.

Although the halt in training directive was rescinded, some restrictions put in place by the Army remain. The day after the Army cut off access to outsiders at its installations around the world, the Defense Department issued its own guidance to the rest of the American military to follow suit.

“The Department will take every step to ensure the wellness of our service members, civilians, contractors and families, while also safeguarding our national mission capabilities,” the Pentagon said in a statement on Wednesday afternoon.

But while the Marine Corps has canceled some larger exercises on the West Coast, training at its recruit depots in South Carolina and California continue along with smaller exercises throughout the Corps.

The Navy has put 14-day restricted periods in place for new recruits arriving to training, and the Army and Marine Corps are medically screening new members as they arrive. Marine Corps officials have stopped public attendance at boot camp graduations and believe that altering training schedules much more could have long lasting impacts because the service rotates out thousands of troops a year and is the smallest of the military branches.

Brig. Gen. Paul Friedrichs, the top medical adviser for the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said the brisk pace of increase in coronavirus cases in the military was higher than the rate in the country at large. “Our curve is not flattening,” General Friedrichs said. “That’s why we went to HPCON Charlie,” a more stringent health protection condition.

On Wednesday, Gen. Robert B. Abrams, commander of U.S. troops in South Korea, declared a public health emergency on his bases, which gives him wide-ranging authority to help combat the spread of the coronavirus among his forces.

General Abrams is one of the first U.S. commanders to issue such an order. In North Carolina, Maj. Gen. Julian D. Alford, the Marine officer in charge of Camp Lejeune, circulated a draft order that would also declare a public health emergency if authorized.

“Any person who refuses to obey or otherwise violates an order during this declared public health emergency may be detained,” says one section of the draft, which was obtained by The New York Times.

For the military, the challenge now is striking a balance between readiness and health, but “preserving the force” is quickly taking priority.

The mantra of today’s American military, but particularly of Gen. Mark A. Milley, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs, is readiness. The phrase “preserving the force” is military parlance for keeping a military that is fit, well-rehearsed and ready to deploy. But that means training and rehearsals, such as fighter pilots practicing how to refuel at 25,000 feet and Marines dragging each other through the dirt.

Those run counter to the social distancing that medical professionals say is required to beat the novel coronavirus.

As part of the new restrictions, the Army chief of staff, Gen. James C. McConville, said that he was putting a select group of service members, the Army’s contingency response forces, into the highest state of isolation — HPCON Delta. These troops are on call to rapidly deploy in emergencies. Under HPCON Delta, they now are expected to remain at home for extended periods of time, the Army said, and may even be quarantined.

“We are committed to maintaining the Army’s fighting strength by reducing the spread of the virus while simultaneously maintaining dynamic force employment capabilities,” General McConville said in the statement.

In the Navy, with roughly a third of its ships at sea, sailors deployed are dealing with another problem: the tight confines of warships packed with their colleagues. The Navy has more coronavirus cases than the other branches, making up roughly a third of the total.

On Tuesday, the acting secretary of the Navy, Thomas B. Modly announced that three people aboard the aircraft carrier Theodore Roosevelt had tested positive for coronavirus. Those three were flown off the ship but, according to military officials, five more cases aboard have appeared. Mr. Modly said Thursday that 100 percent of the crew would be tested for the virus.

Military personnel deployed overseas are not the only service members being affected by the coronavirus.

A staff aide to Lt. Gen. Thomas W. Bergeson, the deputy head of the military’s Central Command, which oversees operations in the Middle East and Southwest Asia, including Iraq and Afghanistan, tested positive for the virus this week.

That required General Bergeson and about a dozen other staff members to quarantine themselves at their homes in the Tampa, Fla., area, where the headquarters is. General Bergeson joined colleagues on a secure video-teleconference on Wednesday, and has access to the classified communications systems he needs to perform his duties, said Capt. Bill Urban, a command spokesman.

About 50 percent of the Central Command’s 4,000 headquarters staff now works remotely, a figure that could grow to about 75 percent in coming days if local authorities impose shelter-in-place requirements, Captain Urban said.

The military’s Special Operations Command, which also has its headquarters in Tampa, announced its first employee, a civilian, who had tested positive for coronavirus. Co-workers who were in proximity with the employee, who was not in close contact with the command’s senior military leadership, are now quarantined in their homes, the command said in a statement.

Military commands worldwide are scaling back training and canceling exercises to help limit the potential spread of the virus.

The United States and the United Arab Emirates did go ahead with one major, long-planned exercise on Monday that involved about 4,000 U.S. troops from the Army, Marines and Navy in the desert about 125 miles southwest of Abu Dhabi.

Commanders weighed the pros and cons of canceling the drill, which was conducted amid heightened tensions with Iran and its proxies in Iraq. They decided to proceed given the importance of exercise, called Native Fury, and that risks of exposure to the virus were offset by the exercise’s remote location and strict orders to the troops to practice social-distancing, Captain Urban said.

Last week, the Army announced it was closing all 1,400 of its recruiting stations protect recruiters and would-be recruits.

The Army’s decision to shift recruiting to text messages, phone calls, direct messages or video chat rather than face-to-face interviews comes as the military, like the rest of the country, is rapidly adjusting to the coronavirus’s dramatic upheaval of daily routines.

The military’s other services are also making changes to their recruiting operations. Some Navy recruiting stations are shutting under local directives. Brig. Gen. Edward W. Thomas, Jr., the Air Force’s top spokesman, said, “We are pretty much operating on an ‘appointment only’ basis at most locations.”

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — As the coronavirus raced across the globe earlier this year, the Trump administration offered assistance to a pair of longtime American enemies, Iran and North Korea. The responses hardly amounted to a diplomatic breakthrough.

The Iranians angrily dismissed the offer, calling it insincere and demanding broader relief from crippling American sanctions. The North Koreans, angry with the United States over stalled nuclear negotiations, said they appreciated the offer but did not publicly accept, warning of “big difficulties” in their relationship with the United States.

But the two cases illustrate the way Mr. Trump continues to pursue his foreign policy goals amid the pandemic, and the way the virus is shaping his approach. Administration officials see the crisis as creating new opportunities, but it also brings new risks as China and Russia seek to take advantage of a moment of perceived weakness and disarray for their American adversaries.

Experts call it disaster diplomacy — the way nations use disasters like earthquakes, tsunamis and diseases to advance their agendas overseas. Historically, that has involved local catastrophes; now Mr. Trump and other world leaders are calibrating their political responses to a crisis afflicting all of humanity.

“It’s clear that coronavirus is going to affect almost every aspect of American foreign policy for quite a while,” said Richard Fontaine, a former National Security Council official during the administration of President George W. Bush who is now chief executive of the Center for a New American Security.

Already, Mr. Fontaine said, the virus has accelerated competition between the United States and China, and could hasten the withdrawal of American troops from Iraq, Afghanistan and elsewhere to keep them safe from the pandemic.

China’s government has promoted disinformation blaming the United States for creating the virus, and is positioning itself as a global leader against the pandemic, which the United States is struggling to contain. One of China’s most prominent businessmen, the Alibaba founder Jack Ma, who is close to the country’s leaders, recently donated one million masks and 500,000 test kits to help Americans fight the outbreak, a gesture underscoring the Trump administration’s belated response.

In a Facebook post on Tuesday, the Russian Embassy in Washington quoted its ambassador, Anatoly Antonov, making a similar gesture — offering test kits, which have been in short supply. And the Kremlin-funded English-language news outlet RT published an op-ed on Wednesday that praised President Vladimir V. Putin for bravely donning a hazmat suit during a visit to a Moscow hospital, contrasting his leadership with that of Mr. Trump, who it said was sidelining experts and popping off for a “slack-jawed press corps.”

In an implicit challenge to American policy against other adversaries, two top United Nations officials, Secretary General António Guterres and Michelle Bachelet, the high commissioner for human rights, called this week for the easing of financial sanctions against economically strapped countries so that they could confront the spreading virus. Ms. Bachelet said the economic penalties could impede medical treatment in Iran, Venezuela, Cuba, North Korea and Zimbabwe — all of which are penalized by the United States.

Speaking to reporters on March 22, Mr. Trump cast himself as providing relief to at least two of those nations. “On North Korea, Iran and others, we are open for helping other countries. It is a very serious time,” Mr. Trump said, adding that he had offered “a glad hand" to “many other countries.”

The United States thus far has committed $274 million to 64 countries and the United Nations refugee agency. Bonnie Glick, deputy administrator at the United States Agency for International Development, challenged other nations on Thursday to give “no-strings-attached contributions” to help the world combat the pandemic.

“In the battle against the coronavirus, we are saving lives, not saving face,” Ms. Glick said.

With Iran’s health care system swamped by one of the world’s worst outbreaks of the coronavirus, the State Department said last month that it was “prepared to assist the Iranian people in their response efforts,” a message conveyed through the Swiss government, which acts as an intermediary between Washington and Tehran.

The State Department could not clarify precisely what sort of assistance the Trump administration offered. But the gesture was a shift for an administration that has worked to undermine Iran’s government in every way it can, and which imposed new economic sanctions on Tehran as recently as last week.

Despite a swiftly mounting death toll, which has surpassed 2,000, Iran quickly rejected the American offer, making clear that what it really wants is broader relief from the sanctions Mr. Trump has imposed since he withdrew two years ago from the 2015 Iran nuclear deal. Even before the virus struck, Iran appealed to international opinion by arguing that the American sanctions were causing innocent people to suffer.

In an open letter to the American people last week, Iran’s president, Hassan Rouhani, said the United States was “aiding the spread of this virus with its sanctions,” which he said “have drastically undermined the ability of the Iranian people to fight the coronavirus and some among them are losing their lives as a result.”

American officials said that Iran’s government had only itself to blame, and could quickly end the sanctions by abandoning its nuclear program and foreign interventions in places like Syria and Yemen.

But European leaders, as well as the governments of China and Russia, have called for broader sanctions relief from Washington, as have some Democrats.

“Rather than continue to pile on sanctions in the Iranian people’s hour of need, we urge you to substantially suspend sanctions on Iran in a humanitarian gesture to the Iranian people to better enable them to fight the virus,” a group of Democratic and liberal lawmakers reportedly wrote in a letter this week to Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin.

State Department officials maintain that humanitarian aid to Iran is exempt from the sanctions, and say Iranian government mismanagement and corruption is responsible for the suffering of people there.

But Jarrett Blanc, a former State Department official under the Obama administration who oversaw the 2015 nuclear deal’s enforcement, said that U.S. financial restrictions had effectively choked off even permissible humanitarian aid. And they dismiss the American offer of aid “as a few crumbs on the table” without any change in policy, said Vali R. Nasr, a former Obama administration official in the State Department and dean of the School of Advanced International Studies at Johns Hopkins University.

“The Iranian government does not want a situation where the United States gets maximum P.R. for minimal steps,” Mr. Nasr added.

Mr. Trump’s offer to North Korea was received more warmly, although its practical effect remains unclear. In statement carried by the North’s state-run Korean​ Central​ News Agency, Kim Yo-jong, the North Korean leader’s sister and policy aide, extended “sincere gratitude” for what she called his intent to render cooperation in the anti-epidemic work. But Ms. Kim did not say whether her country would accept any American assistance.

North Korea says it has no confirmed cases of the coronavirus — a claim experts call implausible.

Mr. Trump wants to resurrect a dialogue that stalled a year ago, after he rejected North Korea’s demand for sweeping sanctions relief in return for rolling back a small part of its sprawling nuclear program.

Ms. Kim suggested that Mr. Trump’s letter was heavy on personal flattery, and that Mr. Trump said “he was impressed by the efforts made by the chairman to defend his people from the serious threat of the epidemic.”

North Korea has often accepted foreign aid during past crises, including national famine, only to quickly return to its previous state of hostile isolation, noted Ilan Kelman, a professor of disasters and health at University College London.

Mr. Kelman, the author of the book “Disaster Diplomacy: How Disasters Affect Peace and Conflict,” said that reflected the recent history of hostile nations, which might be a lesson for the Trump administration.

“There are no clear-cut historical examples of disease diplomacy, medical diplomacy, disaster diplomacy where we saw new lasting diplomatic change because of the disaster or the disease,” he said.

But in hard times like now, even collaboration with allies does not always achieve the results American officials seek.

After a meeting on Wednesday with other foreign ministers of the industrialized nations that make up the Group of 7, Mr. Pompeo said that medical assistance the United States had sent worldwide demonstrated “the American people’s famous generosity at its finest.”

 

But Mr. Pompeo did not deny a report in Der Spiegel that the United States wanted the Group of 7 ministers to adopt the term “Wuhan virus” in a joint statement about the meeting, part of a coordinated Trump administration effort to blame China’s government for what American officials call its efforts to cover up the virus’s initial outbreak.

A statement about the Group of 7 meeting from France’s foreign minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian, however, made no mention of China. Instead it emphasized “the need to combat any attempt to exploit the crisis for political purposes.”

<|endoftext|>

The $2 trillion stimulus package that was approved by the Senate on Wednesday contains $400 million to address one of the most uncertain impacts of the coronavirus outbreak — its potential to wreak havoc with voting, including the presidential election in November.

The figure falls far short of what state officials and voting rights experts have said is needed to ensure a safe and accurate count if the virus keeps millions of people away from polling places in primary elections and on Election Day.

The $400 million in the stimulus package is one-fifth of the $2 billion that voting experts said was needed and that some Democrats had sought. The money could only be used to help states create and staff new polling places to reduce crowding, or to increase opportunities to register online and vote by mail, according to a Senate official who declined to be named because he was not authorized to talk about specifics of the legislation.

Voting-rights advocates said the money was a shadow of the amount needed to ensure that the November general election goes smoothly if the pandemic has not ebbed. “It’s a start, but inadequate to the crisis,” Michael Waldman, the president of the Brennan Center for Justice at New York University, said of the proposal. “If Congress doesn’t provide full funding, we could have a fiasco in November.”

Mr. Waldman called support for the election “a patriotic duty to protect a basic democratic function,” and said that state and local election officials of both parties broadly supported further funding to make balloting safe. “It would be a tragedy if this turned into partisan talking points,” he said.

The $400 million appeared to be a compromise figure reached with Senate Republicans, who proposed spending $140 million.

On social media, opposition to spending on voting by mail was concentrated among conservatives like Representative Thomas Massie, a Kentucky Republican, who claimed mostly that it would open the gates to fraud.

In an interview, Mr. Massie said he won every precinct in a 2010 mayor’s race in Vanceburg, Ky., only to discover that a rival who had won only 20 percent of the in-person vote “blew me away in the absentee ballots.”

“That’s when the light went on,” he said. “You could game the absentees.”

Election analysts say fraud is a negligible problem in elections, but what little is detected generally involves absentee ballots delivered by hand or by mail. Six states, including heavily Democratic Oregon and solidly Republican Utah, already allow all or almost all voters to cast ballots by mail, and 29 others allow citizens to cast absentee ballots without offering a reason. None has encountered significant fraud in recent years, beyond a 2019 House election in North Carolina, which was stained by absentee-ballot fraud conducted by supporters of the Republican candidate.

That fraud was quickly detected, as would be true with mailed-in votes, said Michael McDonald, a University of Florida political scientist. “We know it occasionally happens, but there is a good check in place,” he said.

Since the pandemic gained momentum, several states have sought to alter their voting rules to allow residents to cast mail ballots instead of crowding into polling places. Michigan, which allows residents to apply for no-excuse absentee ballots, has gone a step further and authorized sending applications for the ballots to all registered voters. Other states that require an excuse to cast an absentee ballot, including West Virginia and Alabama, have either temporarily waived the requirement or pledged to include exposure to the coronavirus under the illness exceptions on their absentee ballot applications.

Others, like Missouri, have left the decision up to local election officials; Kansas City does not count fear of the coronavirus as a valid excuse to vote absentee, while St. Louis does.

Mr. McDonald and others said federal funding is not crucial to states that allow mailed ballots, or to states like Wisconsin where no-excuse absentee ballots have been embraced by large numbers of voters. But in states that are unused to it, gearing up for a flood of mailed-in ballots is both an expensive and a complicated process.

“They don’t have the equipment,” Mr. McDonald said. “They have to print out all these ballots and send them out, manage absentee ballot requests, and once the ballots come back in, they have to count them all.”

The Brennan Center asked a panel of election experts to tally the cost of protecting this year’s elections from the coronavirus. They concluded that it would cost $1.4 billion to ensure that every voter received a mail-in ballot, and hundreds of millions more to staff and process the ballot count and to educate voters.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — An effort by the Department of Veterans Affairs to prevent some veterans from seeking health care outside its centers drew heavy criticism from lawmakers and a vocal Fox News ally of the president, who suggested the department’s bureaucracy could undermine a signature program of President Trump’s term.

That program, known as the Mission Act, permits veterans to seek primary care and mental health services outside the department’s system if they can prove they must drive at least 30 minutes to a Department of Veterans Affairs facility. The network of private providers and urgent care centers had been slowly expanding this year as those standards went into effect.

But concerns arose that at-risk veterans seeking outside care could expose themselves to the coronavirus or tax strained private health care resources.

So this week, a department official emailed the House and Senate committees on veterans’ affairs to say the department “proposes a temporary strategic pause in the Mission Act access standards for 90 days, or until the soonest possible time that routine care may safely resume.” The email said that “enforcement of the access standards will resume when routine care resumes.”

Reacting to news of the pause, Pete Hegseth, a Fox News host close to Mr. Trump, said on Twitter late Tuesday, “If true, this is a terrible decision by @DeptVetAffairs leadership that will only hurt vets.”

“At a moment like this, vets deserve MORE health care options — not less. @realdonaldtrump needs to stop this,” he added.

Mr. Hegseth speaks regularly with Mr. Trump about issues concerning the Department of Veterans Affairs, which he was once under consideration to lead.

By Wednesday morning, the White House sought to correct the impression that Robert L. Wilkie, the veterans secretary, was putting a pause on the Mission Act.

“Secretary Wilkie and the V.A. team are working to protect those who have worn the uniform against unnecessary exposure to the coronavirus while ensuring V.A. upholds the president’s priorities included in the Mission Act,” Devin O’Malley, a spokesman for the White House’s coronavirus task force, wrote in an email. “By issuing this guidance, the V.A. is not stopping or pausing the law, but rather ensuring the best medical interests of America’s veterans are met.”

At least four veterans have died from the coronavirus so far, and as of Wednesday, 365 have been sickened.

Christina Mandreucci, a spokeswoman for the department, said that while there would be no “pause,” it would review requested referrals for nonemergency care “on a case-by-case basis for immediate clinical need and with regard to the safety of the veteran when being seen in-person, regardless of wait time or drive time eligibility.”

Proponents of the law expressed unhappiness.

“I have serious concerns with the V.A. putting a temporary pause on community care,” said Senator Jerry Moran, Republican of Kansas and the chairman of the Senate Veterans’ Affairs Committee. “When the V.A. cannot provide care to veterans, the V.A. is required under the Mission Act to send them to the community.”

The Mission Act has been strongly supported by the Concerned Veterans for America, a group that generally espouses conservative views and has influenced veterans’ policies under Mr. Trump.

“We urge the V.A. not to proceed with any policy proposal that would limit the ability of veterans to access care in the community if they believe it is the best option for them and capacity is available,” said Nate Anderson, the group’s executive director.

The two companies that the department has chosen to manage a network of health care providers and urgent care centers for veterans, Optum and TriWest, are introducing services across the country through a phased process, with completion scheduled this summer.

Representative Phil Roe, Republican of Tennessee, said he was seeking more guidance from Mr. Wilkie “about how and why V.A. made this decision and how veterans will continue to be cared for throughout this crisis, in V.A. and in the community.”

In addition to serving veterans, the department is legally designated as the backup health care system in national emergencies. But that function, known as the fourth mission, has yet to be activated, which is also drawing attention from Capitol Hill.

“While the Department of Veterans Affairs’ first priority will always be our nation’s veterans, we need all hands on deck when it comes to saving lives during this emergency,” said Senator Jon Tester of Montana, the highest-ranking Democrat on the Senate Veterans’ Affairs Committee. “Any further delay in allowing V.A. to fulfill its fourth mission will undoubtedly result in the deaths of Americans who are dependent on their government to act swiftly on their behalf.”

<|endoftext|>

A young man whose bold defiance of social distancing guidelines while on spring break in Miami drew widespread attention — “If I get corona, I get corona,” he declared in a television interview — apologized this week for his comments.

“I wasn’t aware of the severity of my actions and comments,” the man, Brady Sluder, said on Instagram on Sunday. “I’d like to take this time to own up to the mistakes i’ve made and apologize to the people I’ve offended.”

Mr. Sluder, who The Associated Press said is 22 and lives in Milford, Ohio, said in the post that he, like many people, has “elderly people who I adore more than anything in the world and other family members who are at risk.”

In a caption accompanying the post, Mr. Sluder said he “can’t apologize enough,” and that he wants to “use this as motivation to become a better person, a better son, a better friend, and a better citizen.”

“Life is precious,” he said. “Don’t be arrogant and think you’re invincible like myself.”

 Mr. Sluder declined to comment on Tuesday night. 

Mr. Sluder, whose widely shared television interview was seen as exemplifying a kind of reckless attitude that many across the country had displayed, was in Florida on spring break last week despite warnings and calls from government officials for the public to practice social distancing in an effort to slow the spread of the coronavirus. During the television interview, he said the trip had been planned for about two or three months.

“At the end of the day, I’m not going to let it stop me from partying,” Mr. Sluder said in the 13-second clip. “We’re just out here having a good time. Whatever happens, happens.”

Tens of thousands of students flocked to South Florida and other warm-weather destinations for their spring break, ignoring calls from officials to help “flatten the curve” by practicing social distancing and staying at home.

Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis refused to shut down the state’s beaches last week, despite warnings from public health officials that there’s a unique risk of the coronavirus spreading in Florida, where 27 percent of the population is over the age of 60, and several people have already died. Florida’s state parks, including beaches, finally closed on Monday.

<|endoftext|>

This is the Coronavirus Briefing, an informed guide to the global outbreak. Sign up here to get the briefing by email.

Forget reopening by Easter, experts say: The coronavirus is still “wildly out of control” in the U.S.

There was still no agreement on a $2 trillion economic relief plan, but Democrats and Trump administration officials were optimistic.

India ordered its entire population — 1.3 billion people — to stay inside their homes for three weeks.

The Summer Olympics in Tokyo will be postponed until 2021.

Get the latest updates here, plus maps and full coverage

Stay-at-home orders, business closures and bans on gatherings are painful for many and costly for everyone, so it’s natural to want them to end as soon as possible.

Conservatives and Wall Street executives are raising alarms about the economic harm the shutdowns from the coronavirus outbreak are doing, and President Trump said on Tuesday he “would love to have the country opened up, and just raring to go, by Easter” — less than three weeks from now.

But easing up so soon would be disastrous, public health experts say. Many more people would become infected, hospitals would be strained past the breaking point, the death toll would skyrocket — and the economic damage would only worsen.

“There’s no magic wand — there’s no 15-day cure,” says Donald G. McNeil Jr., the Times science reporter who’s been talking to the leading experts on epidemics.

The coronavirus remains “wildly out of control” in the U.S., Donald says on today’s episode of “The Daily” podcast, with little sign that the “patchwork” of restrictions in place now has begun to brake it yet.

“To be effective, given how lax Americans are about staying in the shutdown,” he says, “we have got to have a shutdown that lasts for months and months.”

And he says it would do more good if it were nationwide. “The only way to get on top of this disease is to stop the clusters,” he says, and as long as some people are moving about freely, new clusters will keep appearing. 

Endgame in China: Hubei province, where the outbreak erupted in late December, said on Tuesday that it was lifting some restrictions. But Hubei has been locked down for two months, much more tightly than anywhere in America. And even with new case reports near zero, some experts maintain that the epidemic there may not yet be over. 

The Times is providing free access to much of our coronavirus coverage, and our Coronavirus Briefing newsletter — like all of our newsletters — is free. Please consider supporting our journalism with a subscription.

New York City is now the epicenter of the virus outbreak in the U.S., with nearly 15,000 confirmed cases in the city — roughly 5 percent of the global total — and thousands more in the suburbs. The case count in New York State is doubling every three days, the governor said today.

To understand why, we spoke to Brian Rosenthal, an investigative reporter on our Metro desk who has written about the particular challenges facing the city.

What is it about New York City that made the virus explode here?

According to the experts, the single biggest factor is simply the density of the city. Twenty-eight thousand people live in every square mile of New York. 

New York has been testing a lot of people. Are the big numbers just a product of that?

We looked into it. New York has conducted more tests than any other state. However, even after you account for that, the number of cases in New York is much higher.

If you just compare the percentage of tests that have come back positive, it’s about 25 percent in New York, and in California it’s about 5 percent. That doesn’t necessarily mean that five times as many people in New York have it, but it is a sign that the virus is probably more widespread in our community than in California.

What would explain the difference?

What the experts think is that this virus was circulating in the city for much longer than we thought, and it spread before we put in place these social distancing measures. We are starting to see the ramifications of that now, days and weeks after the virus spread, because it takes time for symptoms to show up.

Does New York’s experience offer any lesson?

I think the most important lesson for the general public is to take this seriously, because the number of cases can escalate extremely quickly, and it will catch you off guard.

With a vaccine still at least a year away, researchers have been hunting for existing drugs that might be useful in treating Covid-19, the illness caused by the coronavirus. They see some potential in 69 compounds, including some already in use for other diseases that might be repurposed quickly.

But even with only limited, anecdotal evidence that the drugs do any good, President Trump has already lauded some of them as possible game-changers, including the malaria drug chloroquine and an experimental antiviral drug, remdesivir. Clinical trials have begun, but scientists have yet to report any results, let alone get the drugs approved for use.

The publicity has prompted some doctors to start hoarding some of the drugs by writing prescriptions for themselves and their relatives. In response, state pharmacy boards are issuing emergency rules for how the drugs can be dispensed.

Gilead, the maker of remdesivir, is limiting distribution in the face of overwhelming demand. The company ended its “compassionate use” program, which allowed use of remdesivir in certain cases that had no other approved treatment options.

A deadly mistake: A couple in Arizona tried to self-medicate by ingesting an aquarium-cleaning additive that has the same active ingredient as chloroquine. The additive is poisonous; the husband died, and the wife was left in critical condition.

In Spain, army troops have found elderly people abandoned in several nursing homes. The country has tallied 40,000 coronavirus cases and more than 2,600 deaths.

With the U.S. case count nearing 50,000, the Trump administration said it planned to use its authority under a wartime production law for the first time, to order the production of 60,000 testing kits.

South Africa, with 550 cases, the most in Africa, will begin a three-week national shutdown on Thursday.

Doctors in Cuba are monitoring 38,000 patients for Covid-19 symptoms, and more than 40,000 visitors to the island have been ordered to self-isolate. The country has 40 confirmed cases.

Fight loneliness: Simply offering to help a neighbor or calling an old friend can go a long way to relieve the emotional toll from social distancing, our personal health columnist writes.

Read and escape: We asked more than 20 authors, including Celeste Ng, Ann Patchett and Min Jin Lee, about the books they like to lose themselves in.

Handle your kids’ disappointment: Here’s how to deal with the letdown when school and birthday parties are canceled.

Flex your creativity: We’ve published a cartoon scene of New Yorkers stuck indoors (toilet paper hoarders included) that you can color right on your screen.

The Trump administration and Democratic leaders were hashing out the final details on Tuesday for a roughly $2 trillion economic stimulus deal.

The virus outbreak has brought state legislatures across the country to a standstill.

American restaurant owners and customers are raising money for laid-off service industry workers, many of whom are getting their last paychecks this week.

Here’s a compelling way to visualize which countries and states are slowing the spread of the coronavirus: Our colleagues on The Upshot charted the trajectories of death tolls around the world.

“I worry that unless we find some way to mitigate the overwhelming isolation this virus has created, we will leave a fleet of wounded patients and family survivors in its wake,” an I.C.U. doctor who treats coronavirus patients writes in a Times Op-Ed.

Walking a dog is one exception to the strict quarantine rules in Italy. So to get a little fresh air, some people offer to rent their neighbors’ dogs, or take fake pups for a stroll, Politico reports.

As cities and states shut down all nonessential businesses to slow the virus, they are often letting marijuana dispensaries stay open.

Liberty University is preparing to bring back up to 5,000 students from spring break this week, even as many other college campuses have closed for the semester. The university’s president, Jerry Falwell Jr., is a prominent Trump supporter who has played down the threat of the virus.

Addi’s Diner is a local treasure. They serve a pancake that’s about the size of a car steering wheel. Addi is a Braves fan. I’m a Dodgers fan. Whenever I come in, we make a show of insulting the other’s team. Sunday I dropped by to get a $20 gift certificate. I’m going to keep doing that for a while. Addi appreciated it, but she still dissed my Dodgers. And I her Braves.

—Michael Jaffarian, Springfield, Ore.

Let us know how you’re dealing with the outbreak. Send us a response here, and we may feature it in an upcoming newsletter.

Sign up here to get the briefing by email.

Lara Takenaga, Jonathan Wolfe and Tom Wright-Piersanti contributed to today’s newsletter.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — Trump administration officials and top Democrats finalized an agreement early Wednesday morning on a roughly $2 trillion rescue package to confront the coronavirus pandemic, the largest economic stimulus measure in modern history.

After days of partisan bickering and closed-door haggling, negotiators emerged from their final huddle and announced that they had struck a deal to send relief to workers, businesses and hospitals devastated by the pandemic and the economic disruption it has caused. The Senate is expected to pass the mammoth bill later on Wednesday and send it over to the House, which is also planning to move quickly to send it to President Trump for swift enactment. 

The sheer size and scope of the package would have been unthinkable only a couple of weeks ago in a deeply polarized Congress that has found it impossible in recent years to agree on major new policy initiatives. 

“In effect, this is a wartime level of investment into our nation,” Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader, said on the Senate floor in announcing the deal.

Here’s what’s in the package.

Lawmakers agreed to provide $1,200 in direct payments to taxpayers with incomes up to $75,000 per year before starting to phase out and ending altogether for those earning more than $99,000. Families would receive an additional $500 per child, in an attempt to create a safety net for those whose jobs and businesses are affected by the pandemic.

Lawmakers agreed to a significant expansion of unemployment benefits that would extend jobless insurance by 13 weeks and include a four-month enhancement of benefits. At the insistence of Democrats, the program was broadened to include freelancers, furloughed employees and gig workers, such as Uber drivers. 

The bill provides federally guaranteed loans available at community banks to small businesses that pledge not to lay off their workers. The loans would be available during an emergency period ending June 30, and would be forgiven if the employer continued to pay workers for the duration of the crisis.

“There is broad general agreement that small businesses in this country will not be able to survive unless there is extraordinary assistance,” said Senator Marco Rubio, Republican of Florida and the chairman of the Small Business and Entrepreneurship Committee, who worked with Democrats to create the program. “The goal is to keep employees connected to their employers, so that people aren’t just having to stay home and aren’t just feeling the stress of being laid off, but the uncertainty of whether they’ll even have a job to go back to.”

Loans for distressed companies would come from a $425 billion fund controlled by the Federal Reserve, and an additional $75 billion would be available for industry-specific loans — including to airlines and hotels. 

The creation of the Federal Reserve fund was one of the chief sticking points in the negotiations, as grim memories of the 2008 Wall Street bailout — which activists in both parties came to regard as a flawed program that benefited rich corporations at the expense of American workers — hung over the negotiations. Democrats successfully pressed for immediate disclosure of the recipients and stronger oversight, including installing an inspector general and congressionally appointed board to monitor it. Companies that benefit could not engage in stock buybacks while they received government assistance, and for an additional year after that. 

Democrats also secured a provision ensuring that Trump family businesses — or those of any other senior government officials — cannot receive loan money through that fund, though they could potentially still benefit from other parts of the bill.

The agreement includes $100 billion for hospitals and health systems across the nation, Senator Chuck Schumer, Democrat of New York and the minority leader, told Democrats in an early morning letter. It also includes billions more, he said, to furnish personal and protective equipment and increased for health care workers, testing supplies, and new construction to house patients. 

Lawmakers also agreed to increase Medicare payment increases to all hospitals and providers, the letter said. 

Emily Cochrane and Nicholas Fandos contributed reporting.



<|endoftext|>

PASADENA, Calif. — Late last week, Maria Zamorano, 50, picked up her cellphone to check her messages. “Hi, plz cancel our cleaning for tomorrow,” said one. “Maria, I’m going to have to cancel tomorrow’s cleaning. Thank you,” said another.

The housekeeper had been receiving similar texts all week, every one of them a cancellation from homeowners on whom she depends to make a living — swabbing their toilets, vacuuming their carpets and shining their floors.

“I’ll go crazy with despair,” said Ms. Zamorano, just before another text popped up on the screen. “Oh my God, she canceled, too,” she said, glaring at the device in a pink leather wallet that matched her pink nails. That message summed up the uncertain outlook: “Once the country is healthy from the virus, we can reschedule. Please be safe.”

Household help, often performed by undocumented immigrants like Ms. Zamorano, has become a fixture of American homes. In a thriving economy, even middle-class families have been able to hand off their mops, brooms and lawn mowers to low-paid workers from Mexico, El Salvador, Guatemala and other countries. With reliable caregivers at home, many dual-income couples have raised children while building high-powered careers.

The coronavirus crisis is compelling many families to reassess. Concerns about the safety of an outsider entering their homes coupled with financial instability have prompted even the well-heeled to dispense with their help, and severance payments are a rarity.

Unlike their employers, undocumented workers cannot collect unemployment or benefit from a government bailout. They are part of the bustling informal economy, typically paid cash and off the books for the essential work they do. Without paid sick leave, remote work capability and access to jobs, they become uniquely vulnerable.

From New York to Los Angeles, families have been handling their help in different ways as they hunker down in their homes. Some have decided they cannot live without their help; a few feel committed to paying them while asking them not to come to work and still others have simply told workers to stop coming.

In an attempt to stop the spread of the coronavirus, a vast majority of states and the Navajo Nation have given directives, affecting more than nine in 10 U.S. residents.

When Mayra Brito was hired in Austin, Texas, as a nanny and children’s Spanish teacher for two families — one middle-class, with four children, the other a wealthy couple who both work in technology — her employers had meticulously called each one of her references. They asked to meet in person and one family took her on an informal driving test. It felt like applying for a job at a company. But there were none of those formalities last week, she said, when both families told her to stay home indefinitely without pay because of the threat of Covid-19.

Ms. Brito had worked for one of the families for two years, the other for six months. In letting her go without confirming if or when she might have a job again, one set of parents said they were concerned about the health of their youngest child, a 9-month-old baby. The other said they wanted to keep the children’s aging grandparents who live with them safe.

“I understand their reasons,” Ms. Brito said, “But what I don’t understand is why they didn’t say, ‘We’re going to pay you at least half while you’re at home because we’re not letting you work.’”

She has since fielded requests from one of the families to do video calls because their children miss her. The parents did not offer to compensate her for the calls.

Out of nearly 11 million undocumented immigrants, about 7.6 million are part of the American work force, according to the latest figures from Pew Research Center, in 2017. The service industry employs more undocumented immigrants than any other, but they are also overrepresented in sectors like agriculture, construction and manufacturing. In almost every city in America, they are the backbone of the work force of nannies, housekeepers and gardeners who keep households running.

They are also among the country’s most vulnerable workers. Because they lack legal status and a formal employer-employee relationship, they are unlikely to qualify for government relief.

For many undocumented workers, instability is a fact of life, and abruptly losing a job is not uncommon. But rarely have they faced the loss of so much of their work at once.

Not all employers are dumping their household help.

Maya Brenner, a jewelry designer and mother of three in Los Angeles who employs a nanny full time and a housekeeper twice a week, has asked her nanny to limit her travel to Ms. Brenner’s home and back to her apartment, except for outings to the grocery store wearing an N95 mask and gloves. Ms. Brenner allowed her housekeeper, whom she has employed for 12 years, to stay on the job after she agreed to move into their guesthouse.

“I don’t know if she is going out to local stores, speaking with neighbors,” Ms. Brenner said. “I can’t control all of that. Right now, so we can catch our breath, she’s living here.”

Ms. Brenner said she may have to dip into her savings to keep things afloat. Her partner, Dustin Lancaster, runs 12 restaurants and bars that are now shuttered. “I think we can all do this for two months,” she said. “Financially, we don’t know what it will look like keeping them employed down the road.”

Julie Lynn, a film producer in Los Angeles, said she was sending her nanny of 15 years checks “as if she was here working with us.”

“I honestly don’t know how we could, in good conscience, do anything else,” she said.

But such arrangements appear to be the exception.

On the LA Nanny Network, a Facebook group, the fallout from the virus has been a hot topic. Last week, a nanny posted that her employer had dismissed her. In the comments, other nannies chimed in: “I got laid off too.” “They laid me off with zero money.” “Six years with the same family…they told me not to come and they won’t pay me.”

Silvia and Alfonso, undocumented immigrants from Mexico who asked to be identified only by their first names, thought they had built a stable life in Colorado Springs. She cleaned a different house every day. He worked two restaurant jobs, one as a dishwasher, the other as a cook. Between them, they earned $1,200 a week.

A few years ago they bought a three-bedroom mobile home, which they finished paying off last year, though that still left them with a $650 monthly parking fee in the trailer park.

Feeling flush, they splurged on two used jeeps in good condition for which they are paying monthly. They bought a new dining room set on an installment plan. Silvia decided to fix her teeth, she said, another expense.

Then came the coronavirus. In short order, Silvia lost three out of five clients. Alfonso was sent home at least for a month.

“We never had any money left to save, but we always had enough to cover our expenses,” said Silvia, 43.

A week later, one more client had canceled. “I don’t know how we will pay our bills,” Silvia said. “I hope no one takes us to court.”

On the country roads of South Texas’s Rio Grande Valley, Patricia Toriz drove around desperately on a recent evening, using up precious gas reserves, to look for work. She visited three fruit packing factories. All of them turned her away because she was undocumented.

Ms. Toriz, who has lived in the United States for 14 years, has lost all her work — with the two families whose homes she cleaned weekly and at the small restaurant where she was a server, which closed.

“I’m a trustworthy person, who goes to clean and leaves,” she said of the families. “I have known them for years, but unfortunately, because of all this, they made the decision that they want me out of their house.”

Ms. Toriz lives in a two-bedroom apartment with four children. The older three, who were helping her pay the $600 monthly rent and two car payments, also lost their restaurant jobs because of the virus.

On a recent day, the family packed into the car to buy bread, bologna, milk and eggs. “Only the cheapest things possible,” Ms. Toriz said. “We’re not spending anything extra. We can’t.”

In Southern California, 50 or 60 undocumented workers typically gather at dawn each day at the Pasadena Community Job Center, where homeowners drop by to hire help to move furniture, pull weeds and make minor repairs.

By 10 a.m., the men and women are often all gone, especially come March, when the days grow warmer and longer. But by lunchtime on a recent day, not a single employer had shown up. Workers, who stood outside because of restrictions on group gatherings, soon dispersed.

“Painting a room, tiling a bathroom, gardening, I’m up for it all,” said Carlos Moreno, 49, a single father of two young teenagers born in the United States. But two homeowners for whom he had been scheduled to do work had just canceled.

“Right now, I don’t have any savings. I’m thinking of calling some former employers to see if they’ll hire me,” he said. “When you have children, you can’t be jobless.”

Ms. Zamorano, the housekeeper, was also at the day laborer center.

On a good week, she said, she usually makes $800 cleaning houses; on a bad week she earns $400. These days, her only income is the $100 a week coming from a longtime employer, the only one so far who promised to pay despite canceling.

That morning, the center informed the assembled workers that it would be closing for the foreseeable future. Instead, it would begin operating as a food bank. Ms. Zamorano managed to get hired to deep-clean the tables, floors and countertops. “I need to be busy,” she said, brandishing her business card: “Maria’s Cleaning Services 7 days a week.”

<|endoftext|>

One college dean likened the battle against the coronavirus to the Peloponnesian War. A university president compared the turmoil on her campus to a bad bridge hand. And another president disclosed that he and his wife had been infected.

In letters to students, faculty and staff members, university administrators in recent days have cut the spring semester short and ordered classes to go online. They have broken the news that commencement will be called off and, sometimes, that tuition will not be refunded. They have calmed nerves, and raised hackles, with their words — and sometimes their dance moves.

On Tuesday, the president of Harvard University, Lawrence S. Bacow, shared that he and his wife had tested positive for the coronavirus. He said that he did not know how they had contracted it, but were heartened that they had not come into contact with many people over the last few days.

“We started experiencing symptoms on Sunday — first coughs then fevers, chills and muscle aches — and contacted our doctors on Monday,” Mr. Bacow wrote. “We were tested yesterday and just received the results a few minutes ago. We wanted to share this news with all of you as soon as possible.”

Here are some other ways that administrators have broken bad news in recent days.

Mark B. Rosenberg, president of Florida International University in Miami, framed his efforts to deal with Covid-19 around a nightmare he had, ominously set in Italy, where the virus has killed more than 6,000 people.

There I was in a cramped passenger van along a narrow and mountainous Italian road on a foggy morning. The vehicle was careening wildly along the hillside edge of the road, the worn tires of the left side of the van about to drop off the guardrail-less side of the road into the abyss and deep valley alongside. Where was the driver? Why wasn’t the driver controlling the vehicle so that the 14 or so cramped passengers were not at risk?

Still dreaming. I looked around the vehicle to find the driver. Then to my horror, I realized that I was the driver!

The common denominator is that we are all in this together and that — paradoxically — ‘social distance’ and business paralysis are the new normal. My most recent dream was a reminder to get my hands on the wheel, start the van and do big things with my passengers!

Allyson Green, dean of New York University’s Tisch School of the Arts, raised her arms, twirled, swung her hips and ended with her hands crossed over her chest. In a two-plus-minute dance video she sent to students on Sunday, Ms. Green, a choreographer, displayed defiance, joy, confusion, sadness and solidarity.

When I was in the darkest hours of life, with my friends dying during the AIDS epidemic, or in war zones, I started to give up. I remember thinking if I could just get up and do the dishes today, that would be enough. The movement of washing the dishes later ended up in a dance. Today that movement has transformed to washing my hands, for a new dance, and I am not giving up on you. Like me, just do whatever you can do each day.

Ms. Green explained why she had chosen to dance to the song “Losing My Religion” by R.E.M. She told students and faculty that they could choose to watch the video, or not, and she would not hold it against them either way. The video had thousands of views by the next day.

Bridge is not necessarily the card game of choice among the younger set, but Cornell’s president, Martha E. Pollack, told students in a recent email that playing it had taught her how to persevere.

I am a bridge player — not a very good one, but I do enjoy the game. In bridge, you are sometimes dealt a great hand: lots of high cards, distributed across the suits in an advantageous way. Other times, you are dealt a terrible hand. The great hands are unquestionably more fun to play, but every bridge player knows that you have to play the hand you’re dealt. Sometimes, doing an outstanding job with a terrible hand can be incredibly rewarding.

Right now, we’ve all been dealt a bad hand — and we have to play it, and play it to the best of our abilities. So many of our plans have been disrupted, leaving us frustrated and disappointed. But we can rise to meet this challenge, just as previous generations of Cornellians have when they faced huge and unexpected challenges, whether it was a World War, or the Great Depression, or the scourge of AIDS.

Before revealing his own positive test on Tuesday, Mr. Bacow of Harvard had sent students a letter with his reflections about running along the Charles River while social distancing.

As I got ready for my morning run today, I thought about how I might maintain a safe distance from others who happened to be outside — wasted effort, as it turned out. The banks of the Charles were almost empty, and I had the chance to do some serious thinking.

Mr. Bacow wanted to just say “thank you,” he said, to everyone who had pitched in, from students and parents who helped move them out of residence halls, to faculty members who were switching to online learning, to researchers and health care providers on the front lines of the pandemic.

The Talmud says that to save one life is equivalent to saving the entire world. When the situation we find ourselves in has passed, there will be no way to calculate the number of lives your actions have saved. It was the thought of that unknowable figure — undoubtedly growing greater by the day — that gave me reason to keep moving forward this morning. May it quicken all our steps in the weeks and months to come.

John W. Boyer, dean of the college at the University of Chicago, looked to his knowledge of history to find hope for the future. He invoked the bombing of Pearl Harbor and the early Nazi victories on the Eastern front in Europe — and the teachings of Thucydides, the ancient Greek historian.

There is a powerful lesson, which I believe offers hope for us today, embedded in the arguments of one of the greatest of ancient historians and his magnificent work about the dire struggle between the Athenians and the Spartans in the Fifth Century before the Common Era. Thucydides reminds us of the resilience of common institutions and sustaining values, and above all of the importance of holding together in support of the human communities that undergird and constitute those institutions. Even dark moments are transitory, and crises can end with bright spots from everyday heroism.

The students’ education would help them weather this storm, he said:

We are not out to develop well-rounded women and men at the University of Chicago. As my distinguished predecessor Alan Simpson once observed, the problem with well-rounded students is that they will roll wherever they are pushed.

The chancellor of the University of California, Berkeley, Carol Christ, brought up the 1985 Mexico City earthquake and Hurricane Katrina 20 years later.

In a 2009 book, Berkeley alum and author Rebecca Solnit set out to uncover how local communities responded when faced with catastrophic events like the 1985 Mexico City earthquake or 2005’s Hurricane Katrina. She found that out of chaos and grief there often emerged, paradoxically, a profound spirit of generosity, connection and collective purpose. During dark times, she wrote, we tend to become more supportive of those around us, more understanding, more giving and forgiving, and more in touch with our common humanity.

This phenomenon is now taking shape right in front of our eyes. I see it when our staff bring cookies from canceled events to workers providing essential services to the campus. I see it in the way our teaching listservs buzz with instructors sharing tips on improving digital pedagogy. I see it in the relentlessness of our biomedical researchers, who are working nonstop to develop diagnostics, vaccines and treatments for COVID-19. I see it in the huge outpouring of support we’ve received from alumni to our student emergency fund. I see it in the fact that campus offices are coming together for digital happy hours at the close of a long work day. I see it in the creative ways our students are using technology to keep in touch, building strong bonds even in a time of turmoil.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — One of the thorniest debates in American politics is over health care. Now add a pandemic.

The future of America’s health insurance system has already been a huge part of the 2020 presidential race. At campaign events over the past year, voters have shared stories of cancer diagnoses, costly medications and crushing medical debt.

That was before more than 68,000 people in the United States tested positive for the coronavirus, grinding the country to a halt, upending lives from coast to coast, and postponing primary elections in many states. The virus has made the stakes, and the differing visions the two parties have for health care in America, that much clearer.

“Health care was always going to be a big issue in the general election, and the coronavirus epidemic will put health care even more top of mind for voters,” said Larry Levitt, the executive vice president for health policy at the Kaiser Family Foundation, a nonpartisan research organization. “Sometimes these health care debates can get a bit abstract, but when it’s an immediate threat to the health of you and your family, it becomes a lot more real.”

On Monday, Joseph R. Biden Jr. sent a letter to President Trump and Republican state officials that emphasized the sorts of immediate threats Americans are feeling, and criticized those Republicans for supporting litigation that targets the Affordable Care Act. The letter called it “unconscionable that you are continuing to pursue a lawsuit designed to strip millions” of coverage in the midst of a pandemic.

Mr. Biden sent his missive on a health care milestone: the 10th anniversary of when President Barack Obama signed the Affordable Care Act into law — with Mr. Biden, then the vice president and now the likely Democratic presidential nominee, standing by his side.

While the Democrats spent much of their primary fighting about whether to push for “Medicare for all” or build on the Affordable Care Act, the coronavirus crisis may streamline the debate to their advantage: At a time when the issue of health care is as pressing as ever, they can present themselves as the party that wants people to have sufficient coverage while arguing that the Republicans do not.

“A crisis like the coronavirus epidemic highlights the stake that everyone has in the care of the sick,” said Paul Starr, a professor of sociology and public affairs at Princeton who served as a health policy adviser in the Clinton White House. “It really strengthens the Democratic case for expanded health coverage, and that should work, I should think, to Biden’s advantage in a campaign against Trump.”

The virus is also having dire economic consequences, depriving Mr. Trump of a potent re-election argument rooted in stock market gains and low unemployment numbers. It is testing Mr. Trump’s leadership in the face of a national emergency like nothing he has encountered, and if voters give him poor marks, that could inflict lasting damage on his chances in November’s general election.

“It’s a leadership argument,” said Representative Donna E. Shalala, Democrat of Florida, who served as secretary of health and human services for President Bill Clinton. “Who do you want to be president of the United States when there’s a big health crisis?”

In addition, the virus is a providing an unmistakable reminder that Mr. Trump and Mr. Biden have starkly different views about the future of American health care — and starkly different records on the issue.

Four years ago, Mr. Trump ran for president promising to repeal the Affordable Care Act, popularly known as Obamacare. But his campaign pledge quickly turned into a debacle in the first year of his presidency when Republicans struggled and ultimately failed to repeal and replace the health law. In the midterm elections the next year, Democrats emphasized health care, highlighting issues like preserving protections for people with pre-existing conditions, and they won control of the House.

That line of argument has already surfaced in the 2020 election cycle. “Too many Montana families go to sleep at night worried about health care — coverage, costs, now the fear of coronavirus,” the narrator said in a recent ad targeting Senator Steve Daines, Republican of Montana, who is up for re-election. The ad was run by Protect Our Care, a liberal advocacy group that supports the Affordable Care Act and has set up a coronavirus “war room” aimed at holding Mr. Trump accountable over his handling of the crisis.

Mr. Trump is particularly vulnerable on the issue of health care. Over the course of his presidency, his administration has repeatedly taken steps to undermine the Affordable Care Act, including by arguing in court that the entire law should be invalidated. The Supreme Court agreed this month to hear an appeal in that case, which is the latest major challenge to the law. The court is not expected to rule until next year, but Democrats point to the Trump administration’s legal position as yet another example of the president’s desire to shred the Affordable Care Act.

All together, those steps by Mr. Trump and his administration amounted to something of a policy piñata for Mr. Biden and other Democrats to swing at in the general election, even before the coronavirus threat emerged.

“Trump wants to take health care away,” said Representative Ami Bera of California, a physician. “Democrats and Vice President Biden want to extend health care and make it affordable.”

In his campaign, Mr. Biden has already put a focus on health care, promising to build on the Affordable Care Act and create a so-called public option, an optional government plan that consumers could purchase. On the campaign trail, he has talked about his own exposure to the health care system, including when his late son, Beau Biden, had brain cancer. He has also regularly heard from people about their own struggles. “They walk up and grab me and say, ‘I just lost my daughter, cancer,’ or, ‘My son’s dying,’ or, ‘I have Stage 4,’” he recalled this year.

Andrew Bates, a spokesman for the Biden campaign, said Mr. Trump had “spent almost his entire presidency attempting to cost millions of Americans their health coverage,” adding: “The coronavirus outbreak, which Trump has egregiously mishandled, would be even more catastrophic if he had his way on health care.”

At a Fox News town hall event this month, Mr. Trump said he had not “been able to sell what a great job we’ve done” on health care. While the president and congressional Republicans failed at repealing the Affordable Care Act, they succeeded at undoing a key part of the law when, as part of their 2017 tax overhaul, they eliminated the tax penalty for people who go without insurance.

The Trump campaign has already attacked Mr. Biden over health care, including by arguing that he poses a threat to private health insurance with his proposal to create an optional government plan.

“As President Trump is leading our country and taking unprecedented action to stop the coronavirus, Joe Biden is campaigning on his Bernie Sanders-inspired, socialist health care agenda, which would take away Americans’ access to quality health care,” said Sarah Matthews, a Trump campaign spokeswoman. “Make no mistake about it, Biden’s government-run ‘public option’ is just another name for a government takeover of the entire health care system.”

And although the Affordable Care Act has gained in popularity during Mr. Trump’s presidency, Republicans can still point to rising health care costs as a problem that voters want to see addressed. In that vein, Senator Bill Cassidy, Republican of Louisiana and a physician, cited the substantial premiums and high deductibles that many consumers have.

“Democrats have to have a credible plan to control health care costs,” Mr. Cassidy said. “If you look at what the No. 1 concern is, it is the cost of health care.”

In the Democratic primary race, the health care debate has largely focused on the divide between moderate-leaning Democrats looking to build on the Affordable Care Act and progressives calling for Medicare for all, a government-run health insurance program. Mr. Biden and Mr. Sanders represent the two sides of that argument.

Mr. Sanders, the Vermont senator, faces long odds at catching up to Mr. Biden in the delegate race, but he has remained in the primary and continues to push progressive policy ideas, including on health care. In response to the virus, he has pointed once again to the need for Medicare for all.

“It is nearly impossible to believe that anyone can still think it’s acceptable to continue with a health care system that leaves tens of millions of people uninsured,” Mr. Sanders said this month. “The cruelty and absurdity of that view is more obvious in the midst of this crisis than it has ever been.”

In a poll this month by Morning Consult, four in 10 Americans said the coronavirus outbreak had made them more likely to support universal health care proposals in which everyone would receive their health insurance from the government.

Under the single-payer system that Mr. Sanders is proposing, private health insurance would be eliminated — a potential political vulnerability that Republicans would most likely exploit in the general election if the Democratic nominee supported Medicare for all. Mr. Biden, who has repeatedly criticized Mr. Sanders’s health care proposal during the primary, does not share that vulnerability.

At one of his final campaign stops before the virus shut down in-person campaigning, Mr. Biden visited a community health center in Grand Rapids, Mich., where he spoke of his pride in having worked with Mr. Obama to pass the Affordable Care Act.

“I’m running to protect the progress we fought for,” Mr. Biden said. He cast doubt on Mr. Sanders’s plans for a single-payer system and spoke about the urgent need to improve health care — now more evident than even two weeks ago.

Talking about the patients at that clinic, he said, “They can’t afford to wait for a revolution.”

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — President Trump said on Tuesday that he wanted to reopen the country for business by Easter, on April 12, despite widespread warnings from public health experts that the worst effects of the coronavirus were still weeks away and that lifting the restrictions now in place would result in unnecessary deaths.

The president said he believed a crippled economy and forced social isolation would inflict more harm than the spread of the virus. But experts have warned that spread could be slowed if businesses remain shuttered and people remain in their homes as much as possible.

Mr. Trump made his comments at a time when large parts of the United States and the world were moving in the opposite direction: India announced a “complete lockdown” of the country’s 1.3 billion people. The Olympic Games in Tokyo were postponed for a year. Prime Minister Boris Johnson announced a lockdown in Britain. And Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York said cases of Covid-19 were doubling every three days, with a peak expected in the third week of April, when an expected 140,000 New Yorkers would need to be hospitalized.

Later Tuesday, at the coronavirus task force’s daily news briefing, Dr. Deborah L. Birx, the White House’s coronavirus response coordinator, announced that anyone who has recently left New York City should self-quarantine for 14 days after leaving the metropolitan area. The region is where about 60 percent of all of the new cases are coming from.

Sitting in the Rose Garden earlier in the day for a Fox News “virtual town hall” on the coronavirus, the president said he was ready to “have the country opened up” by Easter and to ease restrictions he said were responsible for harming a flourishing economy.

“You are going to lose a number of people to the flu, but you are going to lose more people by putting a country into a massive recession or depression,” Mr. Trump said, misidentifying the virus. “You are going to have suicides by the thousands — you are going to have all sorts of things happen. You are going to have instability. You can’t just come in and say let’s close up the United States of America, the biggest, the most successful country in the world by far.”

Public health officials were horrified by Mr. Trump’s statement, which threatened to send many Americans back into the public square just as the peak of the virus was expected. But at the briefing, Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, one of the task force members, said that any new guidelines would not pertain to hot spots like New York, and that there could be “flexibility in different areas” based on data.

“We need to know what’s going on in those areas of the country where there isn’t an obvious outbreak,” Dr. Fauci said.

Mr. Trump, however, did not budge on the April 12 date, which he said he did not arrive at by examining any data. “I just thought it was a beautiful time,” he said.

None of the analyses that have been publicly discussed modeling the spread of the coronavirus in the United States suggest that there will be a resolution of the pandemic anywhere close to Easter. Dr. Fauci himself has said it was possible that the country would see a peak in the number of cases around May 1.

But Mr. Trump said he expected that people could return to work and still practice social distancing, which requires maintaining a distance from others of about six feet, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

“We can socially distance ourselves and go to work, and you’ll have to work a little bit harder,” the president said. “You can clean your hands five times more than you used to. You don’t have to shake hands anymore with people.”

But if people are told they can head back to work, commuting by bus or subway while thousands of new infections are confirmed each day, “the virus will surge, many will fall ill and there will be more deaths,” said Dr. William Schaffner, a preventive medicine expert at the Vanderbilt University School of Medicine.

Amir Attaran, a professor of law and medicine at the University of Ottawa, was even more pessimistic. “Nobody voted in Donald Trump thinking he would become a ‘one-man death panel’ empowered to dispense with American lives like cannon fodder,” he said. “It would be political suicide for him and murder for many others.”

For now, however, Mr. Trump and his aides do not feel deterred by how his opposition to measures overwhelmingly recommended by health professionals is playing politically. A Gallup poll released on Tuesday showed that 60 percent of Americans held generally positive views of his handling of the coronavirus crisis. And his overall approval rating was 49 percent, a high for his presidency.

As a practical matter, however, Mr. Trump cannot reopen the country. He can issue guidelines, as he did last week, when he announced a 15-day plan that included closing schools and telling people to avoid groups of more than 10 as well as bars, restaurants, food courts and discretionary travel. But the decision of whether or not to return to business as usual is up to the states, and Democratic and Republican governors of some of the biggest states in the country have said they were, in fact, shutting down for the foreseeable future, while others, like Texas, have imposed no restrictions.

In New York, Mr. Cuomo has already ordered all nonessential businesses to close and all nonessential workers to stay home. In Ohio, Gov. Mike DeWine, a Republican, has also issued a stay-at-home order and has said he is likely to extend an order shuttering all schools.

But health experts said there also needed to be a nationwide approach and that it was not clear that patchwork, state-by-state policies alone could be effective.

“This disease will not respect state borders and city borders, and will move around this country just like it’s moved around the world,” said Tom Inglesby, the director of the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security.

Despite Mr. Trump’s insistence, it was unclear how serious he was about his Easter deadline for telling people in some parts of the country they should resume their normal daily routines. On Tuesday, Dr. Jerome Adams, the surgeon general, insisted that the president does take advice from the health experts on his task force. “He also listens to the governors,” Dr. Adams said.

And later, Marc Short, Vice President Mike Pence’s chief of staff, described it simply as a “goal.”

Mr. Trump has long tied his own political success to the surge of the stock market, and he has been eager to send a message to the business community and to the markets that the economic standstill caused by the coronavirus and the response to it would not last forever.

But experts said there would be an even greater human price to pay if the president gave Americans the impression that it was safe to resume their routines too early.

“The lesson from China is that aggressive measures to reduce the spread of the virus, continued for two months, have led to a reduction in new cases,” said Dr. Peter Rabinowitz, the acting director of the University of Washington MetaCenter for Pandemic Disease Preparedness.

Countries like Italy, which took more incremental approaches to containment, he said, fared far worse.

“Things are going to get worse before they get better,” Dr. Rabinowitz said. “This is no time to be planning to relax the U.S. social distancing measures.”

Dr. Keith Martin, a physician who heads the Consortium of Universities for Global Health, said simply that if restrictions were lifted prematurely, “President Trump will have blood on his hands.”

Mr. Trump’s likely Democratic opponent joined in the criticism of the president.

“He should stop talking and start listening to the medical experts,” former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. said in an interview with CNN. “What is going on with this man?”

But Mr. Trump again reiterated on Tuesday that he did not view the highly contagious coronavirus as any more dangerous than the flu. “People die from the flu,” he said. “But we’ve never closed down the country from the flu.”

The president also noted with frustration that “we lose much more than that to automobile accidents.”

“We didn’t call up the automobile companies and say, ‘Stop making cars, we don’t want cars anymore,’” he said. “We have to get back to work.”

While it is true that deaths resulting from those causes outnumber deaths from the virus to date, projections from the C.D.C. estimated that deaths from Covid-19 in the United States could range from 200,000 to 1.7 million. Estimates from other scientists place the potential number of deaths in a range from several hundred thousand to several million, substantially more than the annual number of deaths from car accidents and flu combined.

Mr. Trump appeared on the Fox News town hall with members of his coronavirus task force, including Mr. Pence, Dr. Birx and Dr. Adams. Notably absent, again, was Dr. Fauci, who has recently been testing Mr. Trump’s patience with his thinly veiled public criticisms of his approach.

But when asked about the status of their relationship, the president said it was “very good” and praised Dr. Fauci as “extraordinary,” attributing his recent string of high-profile absences to the fact that he had “other things to do.”

In the evening, though, as Dr. Fauci appeared in the briefing room next to Mr. Trump, it was a sign that their strained relationship had not yet ruptured.

transcript

From The New York Times, I’m Michael Barbaro. This is “The Daily.”



Last week, President Trump sounded newly serious about combating the coronavirus, calling himself a quote, “wartime president.” Maggie Haberman on why days later, and with the situation only worsening, the president is abandoning that message.

It’s Wednesday, March 25.

Hello, guys.

Hi.

Hi.

Maggie, it is Tuesday afternoon. Can you tell us about what just happened on the Fox News Channel?

Over the next two hours, the president, the vice president, and the officials tasked with leading our nation’s response on the virus pandemic will join us to answer your questions all across America.

We just saw Vice President Mike Pence and President Trump sit for two hours at a town hall meeting — virtual town hall meeting — with Fox News from the White House, where they took questions by remote.

I think a lot of us right now are just wondering, what is the potential for a national stay-at-home order? Is this something that America could be seeing in our near future?

Pence answered a bunch of questions first.

Carly, I can tell you that at no point has the White House coronavirus task force discussed what some people call a nationwide lockdown.

Then, President Trump came on for the second hour.

Our people are full of vim and vigor and energy. They don’t want to be locked into a house or an apartment or some space. It’s not for our country. We’re not — we’re not built that way.

And his message was even louder of a message that he’s been delivering for the last day or so, which is that while we have to take the coronavirus seriously —

You know, I don’t want the cure to be worse than the problem itself.

— in his words, the cure can’t be worse than the disease.

— the problem being, obviously, the problem. And you know, you can destroy a country this way by closing it down.

And by that, he means that the hits to the economy are becoming unsustainable. That it can’t go on forever.

You’re going to lose people. You’re going to have suicides by the thousands. You’re going to have all sorts of things happen. You’re going to have instability. You can’t just come in and say, let’s close up the United States of America, the biggest, the most successful country in the world by far.

And then he broke some news.

I’d love to have it open by Easter. OK? I would love to have it open by Easter.

Oh wow, OK.

And that news was that he believes that by April 12, which is Easter, that that could be when the country and its economy are reopened.

It’s such an important day for other reasons, but I’ll make it an important day for this, too. I would love to have the country opened up and just raring to go by Easter.

Maggie, this seems very much at odds with the messaging coming from more local leaders and health officials in the areas of the U.S. that have been most directly hit by this pandemic so far. I’m thinking, for example, of the governor of New York, Andrew Cuomo, who was warning New York residents —

Look, this can go on for several months, OK?

— that they should be preparing for four, six —

— eight months, nine months.

Nine months of life under isolation and shutdown to fight the coronavirus.

Michael, about half an hour or so before Mike Pence started this town hall —

You have 20,000 ventilators in the stockpile. Release the ventilators to New York.

— Andrew Cuomo was pleading with the federal government to send more resources, especially ventilators, because the number of cases that are severe in New York is growing and keeps getting bigger and bigger. And it is outpacing the number of materials that they have for doctors to treat them.

I need the ventilators in 14 days. Only the federal government has that power.

You have health officials in New York, health officials in California, health officials in President Trump’s own government saying we are not just a mere two or three weeks away from things going back to normal. And they’re basing that not just on idle projections, but watching what those curves have looked like in terms of the spread of the virus.

Also, Maggie, help us understand how we got here and why this is the message from the president at this critical moment — when how we respond, what measures we take, and how long we take those measures really matters. And so I wonder where you think that starts. Where do we begin to understand that?

Michael, you need to go back to January 22 when the president was in Davos for the World Economic Forum.

It’s great to see you. Thank you for joining us again in Davos. We’ve done this before.

That’s right.

And he did an interview with CNBC. And at that point, the virus was already in the U.S.

The C.D.C. has identified a case of coronavirus in Washington state.

And he was asked by the interviewer if he was concerned that this could become a pandemic.

Have you been briefed by the C.D.C.?

I have.

Are there worries about a pandemic at this point?

No, we’re not at all.

And the president’s response was, no, not at all.

It’s one person coming in from China, and we have it under control. It’s going to be just fine.

OK.

He didn’t want to talk about it publicly at the time.

And why do you think that was?

Well, according to a number of people who were in contact with him, it was because he didn’t want to rattle the financial markets. That he was hoping that it was going to stay under control, and the stock markets are his political weathervane, and he thinks they need to stay up in order for him to win re-election. And he didn’t want to do anything to disturb that. And he didn’t want to create a panic.

OK. So what happened next?

So after that, a couple of days later, as there were more cases and it was clear that it was spreading out of China — where it originated — the president took this move that he was widely criticized for by Democrats and even some Republicans at the time. Which was he halted a number of flights from China into the U.S.

Disney’s closed.

Yeah.

Movie theaters are closed. Hospitals being built. I think we’re now up to our eighth case in the United States. How concerned are you?

Well, we pretty much shut it down coming in from China.

The idea was to halt the spread of the disease, keep transmissions to a minimum. He was accused of xenophobia. He was accused of making a racist move. At the end of the day, it was probably effective, because it did actually take a pretty aggressive measure against the spread of the virus. The problem is, it was one of the last things that he did for several weeks.

Hmm. So the right decision in retrospect, but not accompanied by similar actions that might have contained transmission.

That’s exactly right. In the same way that George W. Bush was criticized for his “Mission Accomplished” banner about Iraq, the president treated that moment as if it was his mission accomplished moment. He did not do anything after that in terms of alerting the public, or telling people to be safe, or telling people to take precautions. And it basically squandered several weeks within the U.S.

Right. Looking back at the timeline, we can now see that on the same day that the president stopped those flights from China, the coronavirus was already being reported by the W.H.O. in Japan and South Korea, and those countries are still sending their citizens to the United States on flights that have not been stopped. So the horse is out of the barn.

Exactly. It was not anything close to a “whole-of-government approach.” And at that point, there was a task force that was formed, and it was being led by the health and human services secretary, Alex Azar. But it was outside of the White House, and it was rife with all kinds of turf battles. And the president, meanwhile, was still trying not to talk about it.

And succeeding in that, for the most part.

And succeeding in that, for the most part. It was not something that came up in interviews that he did, which were mostly with friendly interviewers who weren’t going to ask him things that he didn’t want to talk about. And look, it’s not as if it wasn’t getting news coverage. The New York Times had it on the front page almost every day from the end of January. It was very clear that this was a global crisis, but it was not being treated as an American crisis. And I think a lot of that is because the president just was not talking about it.

And do we know what information the president is receiving during this time? Is he getting a bunch of briefings — one would think he would be — that are conveying the seriousness of the approaching situation?

There’s conflicting information, Michael, about exactly how specific and how alarmed the briefing materials the president was receiving were at this time. We understand that a lot of folks in the National Security Council were taking it very seriously, and that information had been passed to him. We understand that Alex Azar, the health and human services secretary, took it very seriously, but it’s not clear that he was sharing all of that with the president or that he was being allowed to tell it to the president. There were some people in the White House who viewed Alex Azar in particular as quote-unquote “alarmist” — thought that he was overstating the threat. And when the president doesn’t want to take something particularly seriously, he’ll often poll test advisers until he finds the one who agrees with him that he shouldn’t take it seriously. And I have every reason to believe that he was looking for people to affirm his sense that this didn’t really need to be addressed. And one of the places that he would go to hear his own thoughts affirmed or for solace was Fox News.

If you’ve ever had a question whether the mainstream media distorts, whips up, throw things out of focus or has an agenda, especially when it comes to the Trump administration, look no further than coronavirus.

They were very much echoing what he believed and wanted to believe, which was that the criticisms about inactivity that he wasn’t doing enough was all part of an effort to harm him.

This is yet another attempt to impeach the president. And sadly, it seems they care very little for any of the destruction they are leaving in their wake — losses in the stock market. All this, unfortunately, just part of the political casualties for them.



At this point, the president is in India being fitted by Prime Minister Modi, and public health officials start basically taking matters into their own hands. They start giving public warnings. One top health expert gave a press briefing where she said that —

Now, it’s not so much a question of if this will happen anymore, but rather more a question of exactly when this will happen.

It was no longer a question of if the virus would spread in the United States, but when.

And how many people in this country will become infected, and how many of those will develop severe or more complicated disease.

And that hospitals and businesses and schools should start making preparations accordingly.

Right.

This was as the president was now on his way back from India, and the stock market reacted terribly to these warnings. And the president was furious. He called the health and human services secretary, saying that the remarks had rattled people. He called one of his top economic advisers, Larry Kudlow, wondering what could be done to stop the slide. But at this point, as angry as the president was, it was clear to him and to his advisers that this was no longer something he could ignore.



We’ll be right back.

So Maggie, what happens once the president recognizes that this is something that has to be addressed?

The president put Vice President Mike Pence in charge of the task force.

Good afternoon. We just completed today’s lengthy meeting of the White House coronavirus task force.

And that was a big moment, because this task force that had been kind of diffuse and fighting with itself was for the first time being run from the White House. And it was meant to signal that the president was taking this seriously. So Mike Pence had control of this thing for basically two weeks. And during that time —

We’re continuing to lean into this effort in full partnership with state and local health authorities around the country —

— he was trying to communicate that they were working on a plan —

— to ensure that we do everything to prevent the spread of the disease.

To address the spread, that they were working on guidelines, that they were aware of problems with testing for this virus that have plagued this administration for weeks.

To mitigate its expansion and to provide necessary treatment to Americans that have been impacted.

And after two weeks, Vice President Mike Pence was getting a lot of praise for his demeanor in these briefings.

If I may, we’ll be back here every day. Get used to seeing us. We’re going to bring the experts in. We’re going to make sure and give you the best and most high quality, real time information from the best people in the world. So thank you all for being here.

Thank you. You’re welcome back any time.

And that became a point of concern for some of President Trump’s own advisers, who didn’t want to see Mike Pence get all of the attention.

Huh. So the people around the president didn’t want the vice resident, rather than the president, to be the one seen as quarterbacking this major national crisis?

That’s right. There was concern among the president’s top advisers that it would look as if Vice President Pence was basically doing the job the president should be doing — calming a nation, giving out accurate information, sounding as if he’s in charge. And that led to this idea that the president should give an Oval Office address. So on March 11, the same day the W.H.O. declared the coronavirus a global pandemic, President Trump sat in the Oval Office behind the Resolute Desk at 9 p.m., and the klieg lights came on and the teleprompter started rolling. And he gave an address to the nation.

My fellow Americans, tonight I want to speak with you about our nation’s unprecedented response to the coronavirus outbreak that started in China and is now spreading throughout the world.

For the first time, he acknowledged that this could impact older people.

The highest risk is for elderly population with underlying health conditions. The elderly population must be very, very careful.

He talked about a ban on most travel from Europe.

To keep new cases from entering our shores, we will be suspending all travel from Europe to the United States for the next 30 days. The new rules will go into effect Friday at midnight.

But the address, which was brief, as Oval Office addresses usually are, was seen as a disaster.

Why?

The President looked uncomfortable. He stumbled over the teleprompter, which he never does well with.

I am confident that by counting and continuing to take these tough measures, we will —

And it was riddled with errors, including about the travel ban.

— and these prohibitions will not only apply to the tremendous amount of trade in cargo, but various other things as we get approval.

He suggested that it would apply to cargo and trade. It didn’t, and those mistakes sent the stock markets plummeting.

Right. And my assumption was that the President hoped the speech would do the exact opposite, which is it would give confidence to the stock market and send it back up.

That’s right. The markets continued to tank over the next couple of days. And aides started realizing that there had to be a major course correction or the presidency could be threatened. And the President realized this too. So on March 17 —

I would like to begin by announcing some important developments in our war against the Chinese virus.

— we saw a pretty different tone from President Trump as he talked about this virus.

We’ll be invoking the Defense Production Act just in case we need it. Last week, I signed an emergency declaration under the Stafford Act.

He described it soberly. He suddenly seemed willing to answer questions without being combative.

Do you consider America to be on a wartime footing in terms of fighting this virus?

I do. I actually do. I’m looking at it that way, because you know —

He described himself as a wartime president. He seemed to be taking this seriously in all of the ways that a nation usually looks for a leader to take such a crisis seriously.

It’s a very tough situation, here. You have to do things. You have to close parts of an economy that six weeks ago were the best they’ve ever been. We had the best economy we’ve ever had. And then one day you have to close it down in order to defeat this enemy. But we’re doing it, and we’re doing it well. And I’d say the American people have been incredible.

This was dramatically different from what we had heard just a few days earlier.

Well, so, Maggie, how then do we get to today, where one week later, the situation with this pandemic has only gotten dramatically worse? The virus is exploding in places like New York. The number of infections and deaths are rising across the country. And yet, the president’s message has now kind of reverted back to where it was weeks and weeks ago. His language has changed. His overall comportment and the words he’s using — they’ve all kind of returned to a period where he was not taking this as seriously.

There have been people in the President’s circle who, this entire time, even as the President changed his tone, still thought that some of the moves that the government was making were too aggressive. And those aides started, late last week, talking about the fact that they might want to revisit some of these guidelines and ease up on some of them for targeted groups after this initial 15-day period had ended, which is going to be March 30th. The president started getting the message in earnest on Sunday night that this is something that he needed to worry about. That there might not be an economy to return to once the country was fully back to normal. And so he tweeted on Sunday night that the cure couldn’t be worse than the disease. And that was the beginning of a massive shift of the federal government, which had moved toward aggressive measures to mitigate this virus and its spread, to suddenly suggesting that they could see the end nearing.



We can’t lose a Boeing. And we can’t lose some of these companies. And companies — frankly, Bill — that were solid as, like, AAA companies. Because of what’s happened over the last couple of weeks, they go from AAA to being, like, they could use a hand.

Tough time.

We can’t — you’re right. We can’t lose those companies. If we lose those companies, were talking about hundreds of thousands of jobs, millions of jobs. The faster we go back, the better it’s going to be. We have a pent-up energy that’s going to be unbelievable.

Is there a meaningful contingency of conservative leaders, thinkers, and politicians, economists even, people in business who feel this way, who feel like there’s been an overreaction to this virus in the form of shutting down the American economy?

There are. Some of them are people who have been the president’s advisers on and off for a while, like Stephen Moore of FreedomWorks, who’s an economist and who advised the president at various points. He wrote an op-ed for The Wall Street Journal with Art Laffer, who the president gave the Medal of Freedom to not that long ago. And in that op-ed, they said, essentially, that the government can’t sustain this. That the economy can’t sustain this. And that there needs to be less draconian moves made to keep people safe but still allow the country to run.

Mm-hmm.

There is no public health expert in the government telling the president that these moves are too severe. There is no public health expert in the government telling the president that the curve is about to let up on the spread of the virus. Everything the president has done about this virus has been a reaction to something, and right now he is reacting to pressure to reopen portions of the economy, as the job losses are facing potential millions by April.

You know, I don’t know whether the President would frame it this way, but I wonder if he’s forcing all of us to reckon with what is the ultimate moral dilemma of this pandemic, which is what economic and social cost we’re willing to pay to save some uncertain number of lives. And he seems to be saying, in effect, I’m willing to take the risk that a certain number of Americans will get sick and will die for the greater economic good and health of the United States.

I mean, think of it. We average 36,000 people — death, death. I’m not talking about cases, I’m talking about death. 36,000 deaths a year. People die, 36 — from the flu. But we’ve never closed down the country for the flu. So you say to yourself, what is this all about? Now —

How did you —

It’s never been done.

How did you process that?

Not good. I wasn’t happy about it.

Michael, I think that’s very much what he’s saying. And in fairness to him, Governor Cuomo has openly voiced the same moral dilemma that he is wrestling with. It’s just that Governor Cuomo came down on the other side of it, which was that there is no cost that can be put on human life.

Yeah, my mother is not expendable. And your mother is not expendable. And our brothers and sisters they’re not expendable. And we’re not going to accept a premise that human life is disposable. And we’re not going to put a dollar figure on human life. The first order of business is save lives, period. Whatever it costs.

New York has been, as we know, much harder hit than most of the rest of the country. Most of the rest of the country has not had to go through what New York is going through right now with surges in hospital stays and a number of sick people. The president says most of the country agrees with him, and maybe that’s why.

 But the president is taking a really large gamble, and going with his gut, that the greater good will be served for the rest of the country by trying to preserve the economic health of the country more quickly than his health experts would like him to.

Maggie, thank you very much.

Michael, thank you.

On Tuesday night, Dr. Anthony Fauci, an infectious disease specialist and an influential member of the president’s coronavirus task force, was asked about the president’s plan to reopen the U.S. economy by Easter.

Where are you now with this timeline of 19 days from now?

So that’s really very flexible. We just had a conversation with the president in the Oval Office talking about, you know, you can look at a date, but you’ve got to be very flexible. On a literally day-by-day and week-by-week basis, you need to evaluate the feasibility of what you’re trying to do.

With the president standing beside him, Fauci said it would be foolhardy to ease restrictions if major parts of the country were still in the throes of the pandemic.

Obviously, no one is going to want to tone down things when you see what’s going on in a place like New York City. I mean, that’s just, you know, good public health practice and common sense.



We’ll be right back.

Here’s what else you need to know today.

[SPEAKING HINDI]

Nationwide lockdowns over the virus continued on Tuesday with India becoming the latest and largest country to require citizens to remain indoors, in India’s case, for the next 21 days.

[SPEAKING HINDI]

In a televised speech, Prime Minister Narendra Modi told Indians, quote, “If you can’t handle these 21 days, this country will go back 21 years.” And in the United States, Senate leaders said they were nearing a deal on a historic $2 trillion stimulus bill after days of objections from Democrats over who would monitor billions of dollars in loans to American businesses.

We’ve been fighting very hard that any bailout fund — money to industries that have trouble — have real oversight and transparency. That’s vitally important.

On Tuesday, Democrats said they had persuaded Republicans and the Trump administration to allow an independent inspector and a congressional oversight board to scrutinize the loans, and were almost ready to support the bill.

I hope, I pray, that we can come together very quickly and pass in large numbers a bipartisan bill that will help the American people who so badly, badly, badly need our help.



That’s it for “The Daily.” I’m Michael Barbaro. See you tomorrow.

Annie Karni reported from Washington, and Donald G. McNeil Jr. from New York. Reporting was contributed by Margot Sanger-Katz and Linda Qiu from Washington, and Benedict Carey, Roni Caryn Rabin and James Glanz from New York.

<|endoftext|>

County Line Pie was almost as busy on a Sunday in mid-March as it had been the month before. So the owner did what seemed like the only thing he could do: He shut down.

It’s not that anyone had directed Jamie Dove to close up his three pizza shops in and around Johnson City, Tenn. But that was what bothered Mr. Dove: As he mulled over his decision that weekend, schools had not yet closed, and Tennessee officials’ main response to the coronavirus’s spread across the United States was to discourage gatherings of more than 250 people.

Still, Mr. Dove, 43, anticipated that business would slow on its own; while his pizza shops were popular, they were the kind of bustling joints one might expressly steer clear of in the age of social distancing. But from the kitchen of County Line Pie, in Chuckey, Tenn., Mr. Dove watched as patrons continued to stream in. He listened to them crack jokes about the virus that struck him as something other than gallows humor. “People’s behavior just wasn’t changing,” he said.

After a sleepless night, on Monday, March 16, he announced his decision in a long Facebook post. He says he was the first restaurateur in Johnson City to voluntarily close his doors. “If I go broke, I go broke,” he said in an interview. “But if I’m uncomfortable in my own spaces, how can I ask my employees to come in here, too?”

Mr. Dove is one of many Americans who have become unlikely leaders as the country navigates a pandemic. As 50 states each devise their own plans of action, some officials have proved far less vigilant than others, allowing nonchalant and even cavalier sentiments about the virus to fester. In those spaces, unexpected decision makers, like business owners and religious leaders, are stepping in and filling the void.

They are confronting what has become a basic and essential question: How do you shut down in a community where many are convinced there’s nothing to fret over?

“Being first is hard,” Mr. Dove said. “But then finally what really broke the dam for me was, if I do this correctly, it may start a chain reaction.”

Mr. Dove braced for a swift backlash as he typed out his reasons for closing. After all, social media posts waving off the “apocalypse” still abounded. A few weeks earlier, when he first contacted the state’s Department of Labor to learn how to best take care of his employees in the event of layoffs, “just to be safe,” he said that no one seemed sure how to respond.

So he was surprised by the flood of support he received, which registered like a collective sigh of relief, as if many in the area had simply been waiting for someone to give voice to their own quiet anxieties.

Less than 24 hours later, another staple of downtown Johnson City, Mid City Grill, closed its doors. The owner shared Mr. Dove’s post on the restaurant’s Facebook page when announcing the closure. “As hard as this decision is, it is beyond the right thing to do,” wrote the owner, Steven Garnett. “Thank you Jamie Dove for helping us make this decision easier!”

A handful of other local businesses, including coffee shops and boutiques, followed suit. Days later, on Sunday, Gov. Bill Lee, a Republican, signed an executive order suspending in-person dining services, mandating gym closures, and prohibiting gatherings of 10 or more people.

“You’ve just got to get to a climate where it’s OK just to say it,” Mr. Dove said.

For weeks, Pastor Jose Rivera had urged his congregants at the Church of God of Prophecy in Phoenix to elbow bump instead of shaking hands or embracing. They mostly ignored the advice.

On Sunday, March 15 — days before the governor of Arizona would recommend against gatherings of more than 10 people — the church was almost filled to its 250-person capacity. When Mr. Rivera offered his sermon, dozens of people gathered near the front, bowing in prayer, placing their hands on one another’s shoulders.

Two days later, Mr. Rivera had begun to break the news: There would be no regular church service the next Sunday, or on any Sunday for weeks to come.

“The people are not going to be happy,” he said in between calls to parishioners. “But if they see that everybody is biting the bullet and we have to do this, maybe they will understand the situation. If we were in the jungle, you don’t have to listen to rules. But people are looking up to us in many ways.”

By the time he was done making alternative plans — live-streaming all the regular music from weekly services, setting up small groups for Bible study — parishioners who had been loath to give up warm embraces just days ago said they were willing to stay home.

“We have to be the example,” he said. “If we can stop this epidemic that is going on, I think we will celebrate together when this is all over, regardless of how we feel now.”

Carlos Ruiz Esparza, a congregant who is studying to be a minister himself, had initially rejected reports about the virus as overblown. But when he spoke with Mr. Rivera, he began to understand, he said.

“He’s being careful, obeying the law of the land and being obedient,” Mr. Esparza said. “I can’t get disappointed because I know my pastor is always doing the right thing for everybody.”

Robert Putnam, the author of “Bowling Alone,” which famously explored civic disengagement and the decline of social and political connections, and a professor of public policy at Harvard University, said it was not unusual for “innovation and decisiveness to be found more at the local level.”

Mr. Putnam pointed to studies suggesting that during the Spanish flu of the early 20th century, survival rates differed sharply among individual cities.

“In normal times the differences between Kalamazoo and Springfield are going to be very clear, but in a crisis your chances of living or dying are going to turn out to pretty closely follow whether you live in a place with good leadership,” Mr. Putnam said. “Times of crisis like this put all institutions under a greater stress test, and some communities will respond better because of their leadership.”

In some states, parents have no qualms about urging people to self-isolate and help flatten the curve — even if their elected officials won’t.

On March 14, Gov. Kevin Stitt of Oklahoma, a Republican, tweeted a photo of himself and his children eating out at an Oklahoma City restaurant. “Eating with my kids and all my fellow Oklahomans at the @CollectiveOKC,” he wrote in the post. “It’s packed tonight!”

A backlash prompted Mr. Stitt to delete the post, but the next day, a Sunday, after declaring a state of emergency in Oklahoma, a spokesperson said the governor’s outlook had not changed from “remain calm, live your life and support local businesses.”

By Monday, two Oklahoma City bloggers were on the phone with a local T-shirt company, eager to spread their own message: They were “staying OklaHome.”

Stacy Gentling and Caitlynne Miller are the owners of Oklahoma City Moms Blog, a site where moms post about parenting in the area, coordinate neighborhood groups and review and promote local businesses.

In the last few weeks, the women said, they had been inundated with questions from readers about how to help their community as the number of coronavirus cases in the state began to grow.

The blog largely depends on advertising to stay afloat, but in this moment, “We absolutely didn’t want to try and take a sales approach and get money or anything like that,” Ms. Miller said.

Instead, she, Ms. Gentling, and the rest of their team tried to come up with a cheeky spin on the need to self-quarantine, then work with a local business they’d long loved to promote it.

Finally, they arranged to have all proceeds from the shirts go to one of their favorite charities, Infant Crisis Services, which provides formula, diapers and food to struggling families in the area.

In the last two weeks, their writers have put together detailed guides to free educational resources, how to navigate working from home with young children, and activities to keep children occupied, like virtual tours of Oklahoma City museums. Pinned at the top of their Facebook page, which has a following of more than 18,000, is “A Parent’s Guide to COVID-19 in OKC.”

“Honestly, we’re nervous. We have no idea how this is going to affect us,” Ms. Gentling admitted. But she said her drive to make the blog the best possible resource for parents trying to navigate the virus, physically and emotionally, had given her a sense of purpose.

“Because if I was just stuck in my house thinking of how I was going to homeschool my kids, I would be going crazy — not saying I’m not going crazy,” she added, laughing. “But being real and transparent, and saying this is hard, and we don’t know when this is going to end, and pumping out resources that are useful, that’s what we want to do.”

On Tuesday, Governor Stitt issued a shelter-in-place order for people aged 65 or older, as well as those with underlying health issues. It was a start, but the moms will continue trying to convince people that it’s past time for everyone to stay OklaHome.

“I feel like we have a responsibility to the moms of the community to share what’s important,” Ms. Miller said. “And sometimes that’s not agreeing with what our leadership says, and doing what we know is the safe and healthy choice.”

<|endoftext|>

SEATTLE — After Mary Flo Werner died last week of cancer, her nine grandchildren filed in through the big white doors of their Catholic church in Janesville, Wis., for the funeral Mass. Nine plus the priest made 10, the maximum number allowed to gather since a widening coronavirus outbreak led to strict limits on public gatherings.

Left to grieve in the church parking lot were Ms. Werner’s four adult children. They sat in their cars and watched their 74-year-old mother’s service on their phones and tablets.

In Staten Island, N.Y., the family of Arnold Obey, 73, a retired school principal, does not know when or how his funeral might occur. Mr. Obey died Sunday night while vacationing in Puerto Rico, and his wife is in isolation in a San Juan hotel room, awaiting her coronavirus test results.

Meri Dreyfuss, a tech worker in the San Francisco area whose older sister, Barbara Dreyfuss, died in Seattle this month of complications from the coronavirus, has put off a funeral until the fall.

“We can’t properly bury our dead because of the situation,” she said. “We can’t mourn together, we can’t share memories together, we can’t get together and hug each other.”

The rituals of honoring and saying goodbye to the dead run deep. Reaching out to touch in sympathy and condolence feels instinctive. But the coronavirus, in its confounding and confining effects — stay-at-home orders, bans on large gatherings and fears of travel and exposure — is blowing those traditions apart, no matter the cause of death.

Postponement and uncertainty, and for many families a painful triage of who can physically attend a service and who cannot, are becoming part of the language of obituaries and family discussions even as people grieve.

“In light of Covid-19, a family funeral will be held,” is how the loved ones put it in the obituary for Ivan Brenko, a 98-year-old man who died near Toronto. The obituary for James Anthony Michael, 91, who died on March 18 in a suburb of Detroit, said that “due to health concerns, the family has chosen to do a memorial mass at a later date.”

Reba McEntire, the country music star, announced that the memorial service for her 93-year-old mother, Jacqueline McEntire, who died of cancer last week, would be held at some indefinite point in the future, “when it is safe for everyone to attend.”

It has become a time of frantic improvisation and adaptation as families and funeral providers scramble and relatives mourn as best as they can.

The family of 86-year-old Norman Merkur gathered on Tuesday afternoon to participate in his funeral via Zoom, the cloud meeting app. Mr. Merkur, a Korean War veteran, died over the weekend as his health deteriorated from lymphoma. The burial was observed by a rabbi at the gravesite in Palm Bay, Fla. — along with 45 family members and friends who watched online from New York, California, Pennsylvania and New Hampshire. It was brief and traditional, despite the nontraditional webcast, and there were few references to the pandemic, until the end.

“May all of you stay healthy, may all of you stay safe,” Rabbi Craig Mayers said as the ceremony closed. “And may we come together in the future to properly celebrate Norman’s life at a time when it is safe for all of us to gather.”

Ahead of the Werner family observance last week, Neal J. Schneider, owner of Schneider Funeral Directors, posted a video of himself on YouTube. With only a few days to go before the ceremony for Ms. Werner, Mr. Schneider wanted to get a YouTube channel up and running so that extended family members and friends could attend, at least virtually. He needed 1,000 subscribers to make it happen.

“Please help us,” he said into the camera.

By Tuesday morning at 5, Mr. Schneider said, he had his first 246 subscribers. By 11 a.m. he had 1,500. The service on Friday for Ms. Werner, webcast by a camera set up at the back of the church, was the Schneider YouTube channel’s first funeral.

“Obviously, it was a difficult situation,” said Ms. Werner’s oldest son, Steve Werner Jr., a lawyer who watched the service in the parking lot on his cellphone. As for who got in and who did not, Mr. Werner said, the decision was obvious: Flo, as she was known, doted on her grandchildren.

“Kind of an odd situation, obviously, nine of them sitting there in an empty church,” said Mr. Werner, 50. “But I think they appreciated having that opportunity, and knowing that if given her choice under the circumstances, she would have probably wanted this as well. The accommodation was the best we could do.”

Some families are grieving in shifts.

At Bradshaw-Carter Memorial and Funeral Services in Houston, a family came in last week saying they expected 25 immediate family mourners to attend an upcoming service. “What we offered was 10 at one time,” said Michael Carter, a co-founder of the company. “Ten at, say, 2 o’clock, a maximum of 10, and then we could schedule another 10 for another time, 3 o’clock, which would give us time — we needed a certain amount of time to sterilize the facility,” he said.

Even though some families are making do, others continue to fret about when a traditional service might be allowed — the kind where family and friends show up to say goodbye.

Nancy Moncrief, who had to postpone the funeral for her brother, Henry Wray Eversole Jr., 76, when he died recently of lymphoma, said she was worried more now about her 95-year-old mother.

“This is taking a toll on her,” Ms. Moncrief said. “It would at any time, but it’s just doubling now — nobody can come up and give her a hug and tell her how sorry they are that she’s lost her son.”

Elisabeth Claire Avery, 21, learned this month that her mother’s body had been found in one of Georgia’s largest lakes. The next unsettling news was that there would be no traditional funeral, at least not for a while.

“She had friends in every city in Georgia, I swear,” Ms. Avery said. “She loved art and music, and that’s how you can celebrate her in isolation.” She has had the difficult task of responding to the many people who have been reaching out, asking what they can do. “Listen to rock ’n’ roll, which she would’ve liked,” she tells them.

Funeral directors are stressed, too.

Chris Robinson, a board member of the National Funeral Directors Association who is a fourth-generation funeral director and managing owner of Robinson Funeral Home in Easley, S.C., said members of his trade association were getting swamped with questions and requests, and scrambling to find answers. Video companies are installing cameras. Mortuaries are deciding how much room they have to store bodies for weeks or months in refrigeration. He said he thinks some of the technological innovations will persist when the crisis eventually lifts, but he also expects an emotional swing back to simpler services.

“I think this isolation by everybody is going to make them step back and really appreciate this person-to-person contact, just the basic social interaction that most of us yearn for,” he said.

Mortuaries face another challenge. Like hospitals, they are running low on masks and gloves that funeral workers need to protect themselves not only from the coronavirus but other infectious diseases as well.

“It’s usually two persons at a cremation, and normally we would both be there hands-on,” said Clay Dippel, a provisional funeral director and embalmer at the Bradshaw-Carter home in Houston. Now, he said, only one person gets gloved up and touches a body. “Instead of using two sets of gloves, now it’s one person does the lifting, the other is there to observe,” he said. “Yesterday, I was the employee who wore the gloves,” he added.

Meri Dreyfuss, the San Francisco tech worker who lost a sister to the coronavirus, went with another sister, Hillary Dreyfuss, up into California’s majestic redwood forests and walked through the ancient groves, trying to make sense of everything that was happening in their lives, and the world around them.

“Hillary said, ‘I want to be around something bigger than me,’” Meri said. “It helped.”

Nicholas Bogel-Burroughs contributed reporting from New York; Frances Robles from Key West, Fla.; and Patricia Mazzei from Miami.

<|endoftext|>

HOUSTON — In Texas, where distrust for the state and federal governments runs deep, the State Legislature meets by law as infrequently as possible, once every two years.

With 254 counties, the most of any state in the country, the Texas version of government has meant that local authorities, as opposed to the elected leaders in Austin and Washington, are often the ones really in charge. 

But the bedrock Texas commitment to local control is now being put to a very public, life-or-death test amid the spread of the coronavirus.

Gov. Greg Abbott on Tuesday continued to resist calls to issue a statewide order to keep millions of Texans in their homes as protection against the fast-moving virus. A day earlier, Dan Patrick, the lieutenant governor and the Texas chairman of the president’s campaign, drew nationwide attention to the state when he endorsed President Trump’s desire to get the country back to work and said that he and other older Americans might be willing to sacrifice themselves to the virus to make that happen.

“My message is that let’s get back to work,” Mr. Patrick, 69, said on “Tucker Carlson Tonight” on Monday. “Let’s get back to living. Let’s be smart about it, and those of us who are 70-plus, we’ll take care of ourselves, but don’t sacrifice the country.”

At a news conference on Tuesday, Mr. Abbott used strong language to encourage Texans to stay indoors, but he stopped short of ordering them to do so. “The best thing that you can do to ensure that we are not spreading Covid-19 in the state of Texas is stay home, unless you need to be out,” Mr. Abbott said, referring to the disease caused by the coronavirus.

The country’s second-biggest state has been improvising its way through the crisis, influenced at times by the sheer span of Texas, by its partisan divides, by its rural-versus-urban split, by its top leaders’ support of Mr. Trump and by its small-government, low-regulation mythos.

A regulatory patchwork has unfolded in Texas in recent days, with restrictions, curfews and stay-at-home orders that change from county to county. Lacking a statewide mandate, several cities and counties have issued their own stay-at-home orders for residents, covering cities like Dallas, San Antonio, Austin, Houston, Fort Worth, Arlington and El Paso.

In cities like Amarillo and in much of rural West Texas, there is relative freedom of movement, although even many small towns have followed Mr. Abbott’s previous orders and shut bars and banned dining-in at restaurants.

“A pandemic does not respect political subdivisions, and it doesn’t care that on one side of the street you’re in Dallas County and on another side of the street you’re in Collin County,” said Mayor Eric Johnson of Dallas, who sent a letter with other local officials to Mr. Abbott urging him to consider issuing a statewide order. “I was willing to sign on to that letter because I was convinced not by my gut, but by our local health community that that would be the most effective approach.”

Texas has more than 700 cases of the coronavirus and 11 deaths, with most of the cases in the major metropolitan areas of Houston, Dallas, Austin and San Antonio. In nearly 190 of the state’s 254 counties, there are no confirmed cases at all.

Texas and Florida are the largest states whose governors have declined to order residents statewide to stay at home.

Mr. Abbott has been under pressure by Mr. Johnson and other local officials and by several Democratic state legislators to order a statewide measure keeping people largely in their homes, similar to those in place in California and New York. But he has resisted, touting the concept of local control that Texas has always adopted in responding to disasters. And in the state’s tradition of independent thinking, the governor has earned both praise and support for his strategy.

“I’m a Republican, and we always talk about local control,” said Mark Henry, the county judge and top elected official in Galveston County, on the Gulf Coast southeast of Houston, which issued its own, local stay-at-home order. “This is what it looks like. He’s in a tough spot in that he’s got 254 counties, the most of any state in the country, and trying to apply a one-size-fits-all solution just doesn’t work.”

Mr. Abbott has said that with so many counties unaffected so far by the coronavirus, what works in urban Texas does not necessarily work in rural Texas. He said on Tuesday that his primary obligation was to public health and safety, but added, “If the goal is to get the economy going, the best thing we can do to get the economy going is to get Covid-19 behind us.”

Mr. Abbott has taken a series of steps to curb the spread of the virus, including deploying the National Guard, banning dine-in service at restaurants, shutting schools and limiting social gatherings to groups of 10 or fewer people. He suggested that more severe measures may be on the way, remarking that he was surprised to see how many drivers were on the road when he was on his way to the news conference in Austin.

“It is clear to me that we may not be achieving the level of compliance that is needed,” he said, adding, “We will continue to evaluate, based upon all the data, whether or not there needs to be a heightened standard and stricter enforcement.”

Mr. Abbott’s remarks on Tuesday came amid a national backlash over Mr. Patrick’s statements on Fox News, in which he echoed comments by the president, who had expressed hope that the economy could be restarted sooner rather than later.

Mr. Patrick took it further.

“I’m not living in fear of Covid-19. What I’m living in fear of is what’s happening to this country,” he said. “And you know Tucker, no one reached out to me and said, ‘As a senior citizen, are you willing to take a chance on your survival, in exchange for keeping the America that all America loves for your children and grandchildren?’ And if that’s the exchange, I’m all in.”

On social media, humorous GIFs about whether the old should sacrifice themselves for the young spread like wildfire, and #NotDying4WallStreet began trending on Twitter.

In Texas, some elected officials were silent on the lieutenant governor’s stance, while others scratched their heads.

“I got to tell you — my children and my grandchildren really like to have their Tootsie around for a while longer, and I think everybody else would, too,” said the Republican mayor of Fort Worth, Betsy Price, who issued a stay-at-home order in her city on Tuesday. “I can’t imagine where he was coming from with that.”

In the central Texas tourist town of Fredericksburg, in a county that has zero confirmed coronavirus cases, Greg Werts was one of three employees on duty at the Peach Basket General Store downtown. Mr. Werts, the store’s 50-year-old general manager, said he shared the lieutenant governor’s desire to “get this great nation of ours moving” but did not support Mr. Patrick’s remarks.

“That is very extreme,” said Mr. Werts, who describes himself as a libertarian. “Extremism in any form is bad,” he said, adding that “something more moderate would have been more reassuring.”

And in Waco on Monday, Mayor Kyle Deaver announced a citywide stay-at-home order for the city’s 138,000 residents, though before he could say a word, a gloved woman stepped in front of him and quickly sprayed down the microphone and stand with disinfectant.

Mr. Deaver expressed both disappointment that Mr. Abbott had failed to issued a statewide stay-at-home order and regret that as mayor he had to issue one at all.

“This is not easy, not easy for any of us,” Mr. Deaver said. “We’re Americans and we’re Texans and we’re used to our independence and freedom, and I hate taking that away from us. But we must do this together if we’re going to get through this quickly.”

Another Republican county executive with a personal stake in the issue said he supported Mr. Abbott. That official, Jeff Branick, the county judge in Jefferson County, near the Louisiana line in East Texas, has been self-isolating recently after his wife developed symptoms of the coronavirus. The couple is now awaiting test results.

“I trust his judgment,” Mr. Branick said of the governor.

In San Antonio’s Bexar County, the county judge, Nelson W. Wolff, a Democrat, said he also agreed with the governor’s local control approach. His problem was that he wished the state’s leaders abided by it at all times, not just during a public-health disaster.

The state’s conservative leaders have at times abandoned their belief in local control, he noted, and inserted themselves into the affairs of the state’s large cities — most of which are controlled by Democrats. The state in recent years has become involved in Houston’s public schools and Austin’s homelessness problems, for example, which has not sat well with some local leaders.

“He fought us on local control issues and stuffed it down our throat,” Mr. Wolff said of the governor. “Now he’s leaving everything to us. I don’t mind leaving everything to us. I wish he was consistent is the only thing I would say.”

Manny Fernandez reported from Houston, and David Montgomery from Austin, Texas. Nicholas Bogel-Burroughs, Alan Yuhas and Michael Gold contributed reporting from New York.

<|endoftext|>

NEW ORLEANS — Yanti Turang, an emergency room nurse at a New Orleans hospital, walked out into the parking lot in full protective gear early this month to meet a woman with flulike symptoms who had just returned home after a layover in South Korea. The woman was immediately taken to an isolation room.

Around the same time, a man who had never left the country and had been in New Orleans throughout the just-concluded Mardi Gras season, showed up at the E.R. with a high fever and a dry cough. He was placed in a neighboring room, and cared for by hospital workers without any special gear.

To everyone’s relief, the woman who had traveled through Asia tested positive for the standard flu. The man, however, did not, Ms. Turang said. His symptoms improving but his diagnosis unclear, he was told to take Tylenol and get some rest. And he was sent back out into the city.

Ms. Turang does not know what became of that man, but he was on her mind two days later, when the first confirmed case of the novel coronavirus was announced in Louisiana — another person, at another hospital. Coronavirus had been in the city all along. Since then, the outbreak here has become one of the most explosive in the country.

According to one study, Louisiana, with more than 2,300 cases as of Thursday afternoon, is experiencing the fastest growth in new cases in the world; Gov. John Bel Edwards said on Tuesday that the current trajectory of case growth in Louisiana was similar to those in Spain and Italy. This week, President Trump approved the governor’s request for a major disaster declaration, which unlocks additional federal funding to combat the outbreak.

The situation in and around New Orleans is particularly acute, with the city reporting 997 confirmed cases as of Thursday afternoon, more than the total number of cases in all but 13 states. Hospitals are overwhelmed and critical safety gear is running low.

Orleans Parish, which shares its borders with the city of New Orleans, has suffered the highest number of deaths per capita of any county in the nation. Of the parish’s 46 deaths — more than two times the death toll of Los Angeles County — 11 are from a single retirement home, where dozens more residents are infected.

In a grim irony, there is a rising suspicion among medical experts that the crisis may have been accelerated by Mardi Gras — the weekslong citywide celebration that unfolds in crowded living rooms, ballrooms and city streets — which this year culminated on Feb. 25.

It is the city’s trademark expression of joy — and an epidemiologist’s nightmare.

“I think it all boils down to Mardi Gras,” said Dr. F. Brobson Lutz Jr., a former health director of New Orleans and a specialist in infectious disease. “The greatest free party in the world was a perfect incubator at the perfect time.”

transcript

I’m half Australian, half Indonesian. I grew up in just outside Melbourne. And I’ve been living in New Orleans permanently since 2009. There was just something about New Orleans that really just got under my skin. It’s addictive. And you can be whoever you want to be. And there’s always going to be somebody who says, you know that’s OK. And that especially happens during Mardi Gras.



You never want to miss Mardi Gras. It’s sort of like that’s when our year begins in New Orleans.



There’s lots of different versions of Mardi Gras. And I feel like this year, I’ve really perfected it. I was like, great.

My four or five days started with these smaller parades. I have like different costume changes — four different costume changes. And then my ultimate costume change happens on Mardi Gras day.

And that costume, it’s themed around cats. I probably worked on it for about two weeks. And I marched in Krewe du Viuex, which is one of my favorite parades. It’s a very tongue-in-cheek parade. It’s a very sexy parade. And it’s always full of locals. The streets were filled with people. And we already for, like, what we love to say is just the party of our lives.

And then you run into everyone you know, people that you haven’t seen in years. Or sometimes I say to people, I’ll see you next Mardi Gras. It’s just an amazing time for community and for people to just spend time together. And the weather was beautiful. And it’s just truly this magical time. It’s when time stops.

Just the idea that there is a virus in the world at that time — I mean, I think it’s the last thing from many of our minds. Well, it was for many of us.

From The New York Times, I’m Michael Barbaro.

People are drinking and sharing glasses. They’re throwing beads off of floats. And unfortunately, people weren’t only catching beads who were here for Mardi Gras. They were catching coronavirus.

This is “The Daily.”

New Orleans in danger of becoming the next epicenter of the U.S. coronavirus outbreak.

Louisiana has become a hotspot in the pandemic —

Confirmed cases tripling since Friday to roughly 1,400.

— with one of the fastest rates of new cases in the world.

3,500 cases of coronavirus.

10,000 confirmed cases.

12,000 confirmed cases.

16,284 cases of the coronavirus in Louisiana and 582 deaths.

Today: My colleague Megan Twohey speaks with a nurse on the front lines of the virus in New Orleans.



It’s Thursday, April 9.

Hi, Megan, here.

Oh, hey, Megan. This is Yanti.

Hi, Yanti. How are you doing?

I’m pretty good. I’m a little tired, but I’m all right.

Well, we’re so grateful that you’re staying up to talk to us.

Oh, of course.

I really, really appreciate it. I know you must be completely exhausted.

It’s all right. It comes with the job, right?

Yeah. So can you start by saying your full name and tell me what you do for a living?

My name’s Yanti Turang. I started nursing around 2009. And from there, I worked in hospitals in Australia. And I’ve transitioned to working in the States. I’ve also worked for the Ebola crisis in 2015 in Sierra Leone.

And do you remember the first patient who was treated as a potential Covid case in your hospital?

Yes. So the E.R. had had a call that a patient was coming from New York that had had a fever. The patient had traveled through South Korea. They’d been in Thailand. And then they had come back via New York. And the reason why we thought that this was a Covid patient was because they’d come from Southeast Asia. So all of our assumptions were based on travel. And so, you know, I spoke to my charge nurse about it. And I said, look, I actually have had experience with the P.P.E. and all of that kind of stuff. I’m happy to take this patient if they present. Not even concerned about it, I was like, oh my goodness, this isn’t Ebola. We’ll be fine, you know? And yeah, I went out. And I greeted the patient. I was in full P.P.E.

So P.P.E. — you’re talking about personal protective equipment?

Correct. And the personal protective equipment we had was gloves, a gown, two masks. But the thing is, it was interesting, like, I didn’t know enough about the disease. I didn’t know enough about the virus. And I even think that I was quite nonchalant about it. I will be the first to say that I said it’s just like a really bad flu.

So what ended up happening with that particular patient?

We isolated them. The first thing we did was a flu test. And the most interesting twist of this is that patient came back flu positive, which was a relief. She didn’t have Covid-19. However, the interesting side, which I think a lot of health care workers in New Orleans post-Mardi Gras could talk about, were all the patients that showed up, even the same day that I saw that patient, that had flu-like symptoms — a fever, body aches, a little short of breath. And they were flu negative. And we would say, you’ve just got a really bad virus. And you have to just take care of yourself. It’s really hard to kind of diagnose what specifically the virus is, because it just sounds like you have some upper respiratory issues going on.

So the people from the community who are showing up with those symptoms — you’re not giving that much thought to them. Meanwhile, the patient who had traveled to South Korea, you are having to put on your personal protective equipment and determining whether or not they have Covid-19.

Right.

Are you telling me that even at that point, that it’s still not sinking in for you that this virus could be landing on the doorstep of your hospital?

To be honest, I really didn’t. The key here is that our thinking was so external.

As health care workers, the disease process or what was happening with the virus — it was getting flown into our country. The concept that it could already be here just really didn’t cross my mind at that point.

Well, good evening, everyone. I’m Charisse Gibson.

And I’m Katy Moore. The state has confirmed a presumptive positive test for coronavirus in Orleans Parish.

Now, we are told this person had not traveled anywhere. The Louisiana Department of Health are also investigating those who the person actually came into contact with.

March 9th was when we had our first confirmed case. And it was at the VA hospital. I think the profile of that patient was an Uber driver who’s from New Orleans. A very good friend of mine who lives next door is a physician as well. And I feel like it was over those two days that it all started clicking into place. And we were like, oh my goodness. I think it’s here already.



I can remember it so clearly. I remember running up and down, in and out of P.P.E., health care workers looking panicked because we’re just not really sure what to do. And then us saying to patients that you have to isolate. And not being able to say, here’s a prescription that will make you better. Or, this is the true course of the disease and this is what’s going to happen. I think that that’s when I felt kind of helpless and then overwhelmed by the ramifications of how this city could manage it.

All public schools across the state of Louisiana will be closed starting Monday, March 16.

The mayor has also ordered all bars, restaurants, gyms and shopping centers to shut down to prevent the spread.

The City of New Orleans is trying to stop any crowds from congregating throughout the entire city. And N.O.P.D. will be enforcing this.

And then it just felt like we were in the E.R. And it was just patient after patient coming through, short of breath, with a fever, struggling to breathe. In that first week, I mean, I felt panicked.

I felt afraid that I wasn’t going to be able to take care of the patients the way that I should be able to take care of them. I know my patients so well. And some of our patients in New Orleans, they even find it hard to fill a prescription, to be able to secure food. I mean, how are my patients in New Orleans going to be able to navigate social distancing? How am I going to be able to say to them, you can’t see your grandmother? I feel like there was just so many different factors of pain and trauma associated with this onslaught of the virus, that I think within the E.R., we felt terrified. I remember leaving a shift and just bursting into tears. Because in my heart, I felt like I’d hurt the community because I discharged patients who had symptoms, but we didn’t know enough. And then they were back out in New Orleans.

We’ll be right back.

As the number of coronavirus cases continue to rise around the country, there are certain areas with large numbers of cases of growing concern. And now Louisiana has more cases per capita than every other state except for New York and Washington.

Streets typically vibrant with music and tourists — empty tonight. Meantime, the hospitals are filled and rapidly running out of supplies. 15 years after Hurricane Katrina, residents are hunkered down once again in their homes, weathering a radically different storm.

So what changed at your hospital to accommodate for the influx of cases? And what did those changes look like as the reality of this set in?

I would say the screening started to be different. We started to isolate. I think that internally, we made changes to be able to take on this type of patient. However, I don’t think we had the P.P.E. to be able to support those changes.

Can you explain that a little bit more?

So technically, when you go to see an infectious patient, say with Ebola, and say now, Covid-19, you should be able to don all your equipment, go into the patient’s room, and do whatever you have to do, take your gown off in the room, walk out of the room, and discard every piece of equipment that you’re wearing. Because technically, it’s infected. However, based on the shortage of equipment, we have to think about: Where’s our next gown? How many N95s do we have? I’ve got to go to the next room. Should I just wear the same gown? Am I wearing one pair of gloves? I think that that, across America, has created its own critical problem in terms of health care workers managing what’s going on with the infectious disease itself. The fact that they have to question their safety when they leave the room, before they go into another room to be able to take care of someone, is asking so much. That’s basically asking them to put their family and their loved ones all on the line. And I just think that it takes its toll. And I think all health care workers across America are going to feel this.

So you are saying that there is a rationing of personal protective equipment happening that creates concerns for your safety and the safety of your colleagues and the safety of the patients?

Yes. Yes. As health care workers, we’re the biggest carriers. If we’re all not wearing masks, if we’re moving from mask from patient to patient, if we’re reusing, I mean, we’re infecting people. I mean, it’s like the worst thing you can think of, really. The people who are taking care of you are just as infected. I mean, it’s like a nightmare.

Have any of your colleagues contracted the virus?

Yes, several of them.

Are all of the workers being tested in your hospital?

There’s the opportunity to test. It’s certainly increased. I would still say that there is a strong culture of not testing — fear of that tests are going to run out, concern of hospital bills. I can say in my experience, I went and got myself tested recently and was given an E.R. bill from another hospital. And hopefully, that will get waived. I don’t know, it was just like we needed people. And so we needed people to be working, even if you were afraid that you might be sick. It wasn’t a place where, like, oh, you feel sick? You should get a test. It was like, oh, you feel sick? Are you that sick? I mean, we’ve all got it, right? Like, that was the culture. I mean, we’ve all got it.

Is it scary to find out that your colleagues are testing positive?

Yeah. I feel afraid for them because we see the progress of the virus and the disease and what it does to your body. And it is scary because we know firsthand what it can do. And it’s really unknown how your body’s going to respond.

And are the patients coming into your ER — how sick are they?

Patients are staying home until they’re very, very sick. And then they’re presenting quite sick — like, get intubated at the front of the E.R. sick. They’re struggling to walk. They’re extremely out of breath. Most of them can’t really talk that much. It’s too much to talk. But the most interesting thing that I’ve seen with the Covid patients is that there’s this sense of calm about them. Most patients that — as we all know, if we get food stuck in our throat or we feel like we can’t breathe, there is a sense of panic. The patients that are presenting are so tired that they’re not even panicked anymore. They’re just tired because they’ve just been working — like, working to breathe.

And what have you been telling them? How have you been treating them? And has that treatment changed?

I don’t think my treatment has changed. I think what has changed for me — and I’d say a lot of health care workers think the same thing — is if I’m on triage or I’m in the Covid tent and a patient walks in, the first thing I think is, if you’ve got the symptoms, are you going to live or are you going to die?



That’s my first thought now. And trying to speak to patients in a way that I really hope that there’s hope. But when I talk to them, and I don’t know — I don’t know. I don’t know if they can tell that I feel afraid for them as well, or I’m just trying to do my job.

You know, I bring ice water.

And yeah, I hope that the patient’s warm. And help them — well, unfortunately they can’t go to the bathroom because it’s a public space, so I give them whatever they need to be able to go to the bathroom. I try to connect them to the Wi-Fi and stuff, so they can talk to their families. I think I’m haunted by patients dying alone. I think we know, as health care workers, too much that patients are dying alone. And so I’m trying to advocate for them to make sure you call who you need to call and maybe FaceTime with somebody, because we can’t let visitors in. And even if they end up on a vent, we still can’t have the visitors come in and say goodbye.

And what does it feel like to be asking that question to yourself, will this patient live or die?

I think it’s really traumatizing. I think there’s an element that, yes, it comes with the job. But when I’m home and I’m here, and I’m even coming home from a shift, and I see my neighborhood and all the people that live around me, I feel like that’s how I’m constantly thinking. And it’s exhausting. But until we flatten the curve or we get to the other side, I don’t think that I can think otherwise.

How have you been holding up personally?

Yeah.

I guess there’s a part of me that’s gone into automatic pilot. I take myself running. I wasn’t much of a runner before the crisis. But I’ve found that I need to run. And I just go and run. And I cry, because I don’t know what else to do with that energy or that thinking. You know, I try to eat well. I’ve got an amazing support network here in New Orleans — not only my partner, but amazing friends that drop off food. And that truly, really helps in a way I never thought it would. It feels like all of those friends are standing right there with me. And I think a lot of health care workers think the same thing. Like a message, some food, just to check in doesn’t make you feel as isolated in your thoughts. I try to sleep. But I’ve been waking up at like 3:00 or 4:00 a.m with this knot in my stomach of anxiety. And I try to understand where that’s coming from. And last week, I was like, it’s because I’m scared mom and dad are going to die. And then the last few nights, it’s because the last two people I saw in the hospital, I know that they’re not going to make it. And should I have made it better?

Should I have spent more time in the room? You know, there’s just like the little things that go through your mind. I mean, I’ve seen a lot of patients pass in my life. But this is this weird unknown. And I think it’s because it’s such a lonely, lonely virus. And people are dying by themselves.



You had described this year’s Mardi Gras as such a joyous event.

Yeah. It was.

And looking back, given everything that’s happened since then, given everything you’ve been through, how do you think about Mardi Gras now?

For me, Mardi Gras, when I look back, I feel like my thinking was so different. I felt extremely free in my mind. But I do think, as a human race, that we will have a fundamental shift. I don’t think that the joy of Mardi Gras, and what makes Mardi Gras so magical — which is community and these magical moments that you have with people, and wandering around the streets in costume — I don’t think that will ever go away. But I do think that Mardi Gras is going to be the Mardi Gras before the world changed. And I don’t think things will be quite the same.



Well, thank you so much, Yanti. I really appreciate it.

Thank you so much.

We’ll be right back.

Here’s what else you need to know today. The Times reports that a jail in Chicago has become the largest known source of infections in the U.S. At least 353 cases can be linked to the jail — more than have been connected to the U.S.S. Theodore Roosevelt, a nursing home in Washington State or the cluster in New Rochelle, New York. The outbreak confirms fears that jails and prisons, with their cramped quarters and unsanitary conditions, could become a major source of the virus’s spread.

And —

I wish I could give you better news. But I think you know the truth. And that is that we are now some 300 delegates behind Vice President Biden. And the path toward victory is virtually impossible.

Bernie Sanders has dropped out of the presidential race, ending a progressive campaign that began with financial and organizational might, captured a series of major victories across the country, but collapsed by Super Tuesday in the face of a resurgence by Joe Biden.

While this campaign is coming to an end, our movement is not. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. reminded us that, quote, “The arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends toward justice.” End quote. The fight for justice is what our campaign has been about. The fight for justice is what our movement remains about.

For more on Sanders’s decision and what it means for the race, listen to the newest episode of “The Latest.” You can hear “The Latest” on “The Daily” feed, or wherever you listen.



That’s it for “The Daily.” I’m Michael Barbaro. See you tomorrow.

The feeling is at once familiar and distinct for a city whose history is punctuated with epic disasters, including the deadly yellow fever outbreaks of 1853 and 1905, and Hurricane Katrina a century later in 2005. Once again, New Orleanians are afraid they could be neglected by national leaders, only this time because the coronavirus is a worldwide calamity.

“This hurricane’s coming for everybody,” said Broderick Bagert, an organizer with the community organizing group Together Louisiana.

Mr. Edwards, who, like most other Louisiana governors, has extensive experience dealing with hurricanes, said the state was struggling to confront this new kind of disaster. “We don’t really have a playbook on this one,” he said.

“If you have a flood or a hurricane it’s only a small part of the country that’s affected, so you can get the full attention of the federal government and you can get a lot of help from sister states,” he said. “That’s not possible right now because this is in every state in our country.”

As a kind of ghostliness settles over a locked-down nation, the effect of social distancing feels particularly jarring in New Orleans, a city that runs on intimacy — from the deep webs of kinship and geography that connect families and neighborhoods to the fleeting threads that bind strangers and regulars in storied restaurants and packed, sweaty clubs.

Now the grand restaurants are offering takeout, if they are open at all. The clubs are silent. Bourbon Street is just another lonely street, its only crowds the hordes of rats that have become increasingly brazen in their hunt for food.

Dr. Catherine S. O’Neal, an infectious disease specialist and chief medical officer at Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center in Baton Rouge, compared this year’s Mardi Gras to the infamous 1918 “Liberty Loan” parade in Philadelphia. That gathering took place in the midst of an influenza pandemic, packed 200,000 people onto city streets and likely contributed to Philadelphia’s grisly death toll, with more than 12,000 people dying within a six-week period.

But Dr. O’Neal blamed no one for failing to take action to limit Mardi Gras festivities. At the time, no cases of the virus had been identified in Louisiana and there were fewer than 50 known cases in the United States. “We were still talking about hand washing,” she said.

Dr. Susan Hassig, an epidemiologist and associate professor at the Tulane University School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine, said there were other likely reasons, beyond Mardi Gras, that may explain why New Orleans has been hit so hard — the dense, compact nature of the city; its tourism industry; its port, which connects it to the world; and the way people connect culturally.

“Everybody talks to everybody, which means you stop and you have a conversation and then you move on and have a conversation with somebody else,” said Dr. Hassig, who rode in a Mardi Gras parade with the Krewe of Muses this year.

Ms. Turang, the emergency room nurse, who worked in Sierra Leone during the Ebola epidemic in 2015, said doctors and nurses now talk of the patients who had shown up to hospitals between Mardi Gras and the announcement of that first case on March 9, people with moderate flulike symptoms who had tested negative for the flu.

“We were blindsided,” she said, “by the fact that it was actually here in New Orleans already.”

That first confirmed case in Louisiana was announced less than two weeks after Fat Tuesday. Around the same time, reports had begun popping up around the South — Tennessee, Arkansas, Texas — of people who had tested positive after recently returning from New Orleans.

The first people to test positive in New Orleans, according to Dr. Jennifer Avegno, the city’s health director, had not recently returned from anywhere. But their array of unusual symptoms had troubled doctors.

“They just had a sense that something wasn’t right,” Dr. Avegno said. “It became clear pretty quickly that there was community spread, that the cases were not directly linked to each other.”

Within days, the state’s schools were shut down and large public gatherings in New Orleans were banned — including the huge annual St. Patrick’s Day parade, though enough people came out anyway that Saturday to draw the police. A week after the first case was announced, the governor issued an order closing restaurant dining rooms and bars, some of which had to call carpenters to install locks on doors that had not been secured for years.

Mr. Edwards also limited gatherings to fewer than 50 people. But some have remained defiant, including Tony Spell, the pastor at Life Tabernacle Church outside of Baton Rouge, where, according to reports, hundreds of people have been gathering to pray without observing social distancing rules. Mr. Spell has called the virus “spiritually motivated” and said that he would heal infected members of his flock by laying hands on them and praying.

As testing ramped up, the number of cases in Louisiana surged. A medical worker at the city jail tested positive, as did a founder of the Grammy-winning Rebirth Brass Band. Sean Payton, the coach of the New Orleans Saints, announced that he had tested positive. The archbishop of New Orleans did, too.

The growth rate of new infections in Louisiana was the fastest in the world when comparing areas during the two weeks that followed their first confirmed diagnosis, according to a recent study by Gary A. Wagner, an economics professor at the University of Louisiana at Lafayette. In a small and close city like New Orleans, that means that nearly everyone knows someone who has been infected.

“One of my members, Sister Monica, is on a ventilator,” said Tyrone Jefferson, 46, pastor of a church in the city’s St. Roch neighborhood. “Another rushed to a hospital yesterday. Two are at home with it.”

Doctors and nurses at city hospitals, like hospital workers all over the country, describe a dire shortage of critical protective gear. The Cajun Navy, one of the informal Louisiana volunteer brigades famous for rescuing people from floodwaters, and the Cajun Army have delivered several boxes of masks and gallons of hand sanitizer to medical workers.

But the deluge of patients keeps coming.

Mr. Edwards, a moderate Democrat in his second term, has always been careful about criticizing the Trump administration for both political and practical reasons: After a hurricane, there is little use in picking a fight with a federal government that holds the key to disaster relief.

On Tuesday, however, Mr. Edwards said he would like to see the Trump administration get more involved in the coronavirus response in a way that prioritized harder-hit areas.

Ventilators and personal protection equipment should be allocated, he said, “based upon demonstrated need, as opposed to the current situation, where every state, every health care provider, is working the best they can but independent from one another.”

As the disease spreads and sickens those fighting it, a potential shortage of medical workers, particularly nurses and respiratory therapists, is for many the biggest worry. For now, many exposed health care workers — a description that accounts for more than half of the city’s emergency medical technicians — are wearing masks and checking their temperatures but, as long as they are not showing symptoms, staying on the job.

The attendant tragedy of the pandemic — economic devastation to a city that lives on tourism and good times — has been following close behind. Most of the city’s tens of thousands of hotel and restaurant jobs do not pay enough for workers to have sufficiently saved for weeks on lockdown, but they pay better than nothing at all.

“Our food banks say they’ll be out of food by next week,” said Mayor LaToya Cantrell of New Orleans, adding that the city was estimating a budget deficit of at least $100 million next year, given the vanishing sales tax revenues.

“And,” the mayor continued, “we have hurricane season coming in June.”

In his request for a federal emergency declaration, Governor Edwards said that projected hospitalizations would exceed the state’s capacity by April 4, and that the state had begun contracting to “build out hotels” to provide additional hospital beds. Three state parks have also been outfitted with trailers to house more than 300 patients.

If hospitals hit capacity, state officials are considering housing noncritical patients at the New Orleans Ernest N. Morial Convention Center, which housed thousands of residents who were forced from their homes by Katrina’s floodwaters, and became a symbol of the chaotic response to that disaster.

For now, the death toll continues its steady climb. A well-known 44-year-old D.J. who championed the city’s bounce music scene. A 53-year-old man who drove for Uber and Lyft at Mardi Gras. On Thursday, health department officials reported the death of the state’s youngest known victim, a 17-year-old in Orleans Parish.

Ellis Joseph was friends with Oliver Stokes, the D.J., and also with Ronald Lewis, a New Orleans cultural icon who died on Friday of the coronavirus, as a test would posthumously confirm. In another time, Mr. Joseph would have walked with his bass drum behind the coffin at Mr. Lewis’s funeral procession, leading a brass band in the traditional dirge “Just a Closer Walk With Thee.” Hundreds if not thousands of people would have followed or lined the streets.

“I’m going to say a silent prayer for Mr. Ronald now and roll for him later,” said Mr. Joseph, who is now trying to avoid even going to the store.

The funeral was on Monday. In accordance with the current regulations, it was limited to a pastor and nine others.

Katy Reckdahl reported from New Orleans, Campbell Robertson from Pittsburgh and Richard Fausset from Atlanta.

<|endoftext|>

A day after Senator Bernie Sanders’s campaign indicated that he would participate in a presidential debate next month if one is held, Joseph R. Biden Jr. expressed impatience with the idea, saying that “we’ve had enough debates” and adding that his focus was on combating the coronavirus crisis.

Mr. Biden, the former vice president, has amassed a significant delegate lead over Mr. Sanders, but has treaded carefully around the subject of his rival’s future, mindful of the risks of alienating the senator’s supporters should Mr. Biden clinch the nomination. But on Tuesday, Mr. Sanders’s campaign offered the clearest signal yet that the senator intends to keep competing with Mr. Biden, when a spokesman confirmed his intention to appear at the next debate, if one occurs.

“My focus is just dealing with this crisis right now,” Mr. Biden said on Wednesday, when asked if he wanted another debate next month, and if he would participate. “I haven’t thought about any more debates. I think we’ve had enough debates. I think we should get on with this.”

Like Mr. Sanders, Mr. Biden has been forced off the physical campaign trail because of the coronavirus outbreak, and is grappling with new ways to connect with voters and break through in the news media. His comments came as part of a wide-ranging set of remarks about engaging young people and confronting the virus that he delivered to reporters and other viewers from his home studio in Wilmington, Del.

Mr. Biden continued to press his argument that President Trump has been too slow in responding to the crisis, and he took issue with the president’s stated desire to reopen the country by Easter, on April 12. Mr. Biden warned against following “some arbitrary or symbolic timeline.”

“It would be a catastrophic thing to do for our people and for our economy if we sent people back to work just as we were beginning to see the impact of social distancing take hold, only to unleash a second spike in infections,” he said. “That would be far more devastating in the long run than implementing a thorough strategy.”

Polls show that the former vice president has been struggling to connect with young voters, an area of strength for Mr. Sanders. Before taking a handful of questions via a video conference with reporters, Mr. Biden aimed to empathize with the economic challenges facing younger Americans in this moment of national upheaval — and offered a reminder that they, too, are at risk.

“Every day we’re hearing heart-rending stories of deaths from people in their twenties and their thirties,” he said, urging adherence to public safety guidelines about social distancing. “But here’s what we must not do. We must not allow this pandemic to rob our young people of the futures and the economic opportunities that they’ve been working so hard to build.”

The nation, he said, is facing “twin crises.”

“The public health crisis is hitting older Americans especially hard,” he said. “The economic crisis is hitting younger people. All those hard-working young people in service industries, and in retail, that are being decimated by layoffs. All those who are hustling to make a living in the gig economy. They deserve the same benefits as everyone else does. We have to make sure they get them.”

Later on Wednesday, Mr. Biden held an hourlong virtual roundtable with younger supporters — his team called it a happy hour, though Mr. Biden, who does not drink alcohol, said he had Gatorade on hand — where the former vice president discussed a wide range of subjects raised by young supporters. 

He noted his early support for gay marriage — as vice president he spoke out on the subject before President Barack Obama did (Mr. Obama, he said, “gave me a big hug, and said: ‘You told me you weren’t going to be quiet. And you’re right’”). He stressed his support for protecting transgender people. He detailed his views on combating climate change and promised that his administration, should he win the presidency, would reflect the diversity of the nation. He also promised to campaign in states that are traditionally challenging for Democrats, “like North Carolina, Texas, et cetera,” saying that “we haven’t built up a bench.”

“My responsibility is to bring along a new generation of leadership,” he said. “And I start that by the people I pick to serve in my administration.”

And Mr. Biden, 77, twice described himself as something of a transitional figure.

“You all are the answer for us,” he said, a message aimed at younger voters. “And I hope I can just be one of those transition figures that gets to the point where you guys are running the whole show.”

It echoed remarks he made this month in Michigan, where he described himself as a “bridge” to the next generation of leadership. 

“I really mean it,” Mr. Biden said on Wednesday, referring to that remark. “That’s why I’ve made the commitment, as I said, for an administration that’s going to look like the country, including choosing a woman running mate. That’s why I wanted to make sure we spent today talking to you.”

Mr. Sanders has also been holding live stream events to talk about the threat from the virus and make the case that his policies on health care and income inequality have become more relevant amid a national health crisis. And as a sitting senator from Vermont, he is part of the Senate’s effort to pass an economic stabilization package.

When the virus put a halt to in-person campaigning, Mr. Biden faded somewhat from public view. But his campaign has now installed a makeshift television studio in his house, and he has made use of the studio several times in the past few days, including for appearances on CNN, MSNBC and ABC’s “The View.”

Still, Mr. Biden, who served for 36 years in the Senate, acknowledged the limitations of being confined to his house as a private citizen — albeit one who is likely to become a major party presidential nominee — as lawmakers scramble to respond to the crisis.

“I have to tell you, I find, I guess like anybody who cares about this, I’m chomping at the bit,” he said. “I wish I were still in the Senate, you know, being able to impact on some of these things. But I am where I am. And I hope to be the nominee of the Democratic Party, and I hope I’m able to get my message across as we go forward.”

<|endoftext|>

Hi. Welcome to On Politics, your guide to the day in national politics. I’m Lisa Lerer, your host.

Sign up here to get On Politics in your inbox every weekday.

Immediately after President Trump announced yesterday that he wanted to reopen the country by Easter, a Fox News host dubbed his plan “a great American resurrection.”

Turns out the president may be experiencing a resurrection of his own.

A series of polls released this week showed Mr. Trump receiving some of the highest marks of his presidency.

A Gallup poll published on Tuesday showed Mr. Trump’s overall approval rating tied for its highest point in his presidency, at 49 percent. Sixty percent of Americans gave him positive reviews for his handling of the coronavirus situation.

Most strikingly, his job approval among independents rose to 43 percent from 35 percent earlier this month, and it rose among Democrats — yes, Democrats — to 13 percent, from 7 percent. More than a quarter — 27 percent — of Democrats approve of his response to the coronavirus pandemic.

Polls from CBS News and Monmouth University found similar results, with at least 50 percent of Americans saying Mr. Trump had done a good job handling the outbreak.

Democrats point out that governors are still getting higher marks than the president. In the Monmouth polling, 72 percent said their state’s governor had done a good job.

The president’s critics are also eager to play down his rising numbers as simply the norm in times of crisis. They have a point: Historically, polling shows a rallying effect behind a president during national challenges.

“Most presidents get a bump when there’s a national crisis,” said Anna Greenberg, a Democratic pollster. “While I think many of us would argue his handling of this crisis has been insufficient and inconsistent, when people started to tune in to the severity of the epidemic was when he started sounding more serious.”

Yet, Mr. Trump hasn’t behaved like a traditional president in a crisis moment. At times, he’s acted more like our national id, telling Americans what they may want to hear, even if those claims are false or are considered downright dangerous by public health experts.

His Easter promise is a perfect example. Experts say the idea that Americans can return to normal life by April 12 is about as realistic as a giant bunny hiding chocolate eggs.

None of the public analyses modeling the spread of the coronavirus suggest that there will be a resolution of the pandemic in the United States anywhere close to Easter. Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, a member of Mr. Trump’s task force, has said it’s possible that the country will see a peak in the number of cases around May 1.

Believe me, I understand the desire to know when normal life will resume. Finding the space to write to you this evening involved bribing children with television and cookies. But in this case, experts agree that opening up too early can be catastrophic. One model found that, without action by governments and individuals, 2.2 million people in the United States could die (though some action has, of course, already been taken).

And Mr. Trump cannot actually reopen the country with a snap of his fingers: Governors issue stay-at-home orders and decide what opens and remains closed in their states. The president doesn’t have the authority to overrule them.

That reality may not matter, at least not politically. The polling shows that despite Mr. Trump’s dubious comments, Americans blame the virus rather than the president for our current situation. At least, for now.

It’s a classic move from the Trump political playbook: He makes an unrealistic promise (ahem, completing The Wall) and then blames the establishment, the news media, Senator Mitt Romney, whoever, when it fails to happen.

He could execute the same plan if governors ignored his push to reopen, as they had already indicated they were likely to do. Mr. Trump could then attribute any economic pain to their decisions to flout his recommendation.

Or, things could go in a vastly different direction. Let’s say some governors lift restrictions too early, the medical disaster predicted by experts occurs and the economy takes another nose dive. It’s harder to see how Mr. Trump can escape some culpability, given that he has injected himself into the situation with a request that undermines public health recommendations.

As with so many parts of this evolving situation, we’ll just have to wait and see. Probably past Easter.

By Nick Corasaniti

We wrote in yesterday’s newsletter that pro-Democrat groups are starting to run attack ads criticizing President Trump’s handling of the coronavirus outbreak. But one such ad appears to have gone too far for the executives at Fox News.

Unite the Country, a super PAC supporting Joe Biden, released an ad late Tuesday night that was critical of Mr. Trump’s stewardship of the response to the virus, highlighting the president’s previous statements minimizing the crisis. The ad includes a narrator saying, “Donald Trump didn’t create the coronavirus, but he is the one who called hoax.”

On Wednesday, the super PAC said in a tweet that Fox News had rejected the ad and would not allow it to air on the network.

Tom Lowell, the channel’s vice president and managing editor of news, said in a statement, “Fox News declined the spot proposed by Unite the Country because it contains a statement that has been widely disputed by independent sources as being misleading or false.”

At issue was the ad’s reference to comments Mr. Trump made about “a hoax.” While critics said that Mr. Trump had called the virus itself a hoax, the president and his supporters argued that he was referring to Democrats’ criticism of his response to the virus. Several independent fact checkers had agreed that Mr. Trump did not call the virus itself a hoax, though he made many other statements playing down the threat it posed.

Networks do occasionally reject campaign ads from running on their network, either citing known false statements or technicalities (like a missing “I approve this message” disclaimer). In September, CNN refused to air an ad by the Trump campaign regarding Mr. Biden and Ukraine, citing a similar reason about misleading statements in the ad.

Officials at Fox News said they had turned down several ads this year from groups across the political spectrum, including an ad from the Trump campaign about impeachment that claimed Democrats were carrying out a “coup.”

Unite the Country said its ad would still run on other networks, including CNN, MSNBC, NBC and ABC, and would be backed by “seven figures.” And it will be on air soon: The group just made a $200,000 ad reservation on CNN’s national network to begin today, according to the tracking firm Advertising Analytics.

We’ve received so many messages from our readers over the past few days that we’ve decided to start a new feature to share your experiences from life on lockdown. The opening entry in our little diary comes from Daniel Jaret, a daily newsletter reader in New York City who recently proposed to his fiancée, Carly Scheinberg.

The two wanted to share the good news with Mr. Jaret’s grandparents. Luckily, they live on the second floor!

Congratulations, Daniel and Carly. We here at On Politics send our elbow-bump love and wishes for a non-socially distant wedding and a largely hand sanitizer-free marriage.

Do you have an experience to share, good or bad? We want to hear it. Please email us at onpolitics@nytimes.com, and don’t forget to include your name and where you live.

No, every day cannot be “no pants day.”

Thanks for reading. On Politics is your guide to the political news cycle, delivering clarity from the chaos.

On Politics is also available as a newsletter. Sign up here to get it delivered to your inbox.

Is there anything you think we’re missing? Anything you want to see more of? We’d love to hear from you. Email us at onpolitics@nytimes.com.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — The $2 trillion stimulus package passed by the Senate on Wednesday will send about $14 billion to colleges and universities that are hemorrhaging money as they close their campuses and try to stay afloat with distance learning.

But higher education leaders say that is far short of what they need in the face of an education crisis that is greater than any they have faced in a generation.

The deal — likely to pass the House on Friday — would create a $30.75 billion education stabilization fund, 46 percent of which would go to higher education. That is a fraction of the $50 billion that higher education leaders said they needed.

Of that $30.75 billion, around $13 billion would go to primary and secondary schools, which had requested at least $75 billion to help keep their systems intact with more than 55 million children out of school. Governors would receive about 10 percent of the fund, or about $3 billion, to put toward emergency education costs.

The deal would also allow borrowers to defer their federal student loan payments for six months, without penalty and without added interest costs. In a separate move, Education Secretary Betsy DeVos announced on Wednesday that she would also stop collecting payments and garnishing wages from borrowers who default on their loans. The Education Department will refund $1.8 billion to borrowers who had money seized by the government since March 13.

The funding for higher education is significantly higher than the $6 billion first proposed by Senate Republicans, and is closer to the $15 billion proposed by House Democrats. But education leaders are hoping for more relief in additional bills that may emerge in the coming weeks.

“While this legislation is an improvement from where the Senate started, the amount of money it provides to students and higher education institutions remains woefully inadequate,” said Ted Mitchell, the president of the American Council on Education, which represents more than 1,700 colleges and universities.

In a memo, the council joined other associations representing virtually every school in the country to request at least $50 billion to help with student housing costs, other student expenditures and the damages that universities are suffering from their shutdowns. They also asked for a separate $7.8 billion to help with the costs of technology needed for digital learning.

Colleges were among the first institutions in the country to shut down operations amid the coronavirus outbreak, and shortly after the higher education sector’s bond rating was downgraded by Moody’s to negative from stable. “Universities face unprecedented enrollment uncertainty, risks to multiple revenue streams and potential material erosion in their balance sheets,” it said.

Already, schools are refunding tens of millions of dollars in costs for housing and food plans, struggling to pay salaries for faculty and staff members and incurring new costs associated with digital classrooms. And with the college admissions season this spring in flux, they cannot predict tuition revenue in the fall.

“Campuses are losing staggering sums,” Mr. Mitchell said. “If these needs are not met, students are going to suffer financially and may drop out.”

The bill ensures funding for the hardest hit institutions, those that serve overwhelmingly low-income populations, with about $1 billion for historically black colleges and universities, and other minority-serving institutions and tribal colleges.

Michael L. Lomax, the president of the United Negro College Fund, said the funding would help the schools move to digital platforms, adding, “thankfully, this time Congress remembered us.”

Public and private research universities joined medical schools and teaching hospitals in requesting an additional $13 billion for their research operations. The schools said they needed help paying staff members, such as postdoctoral students, and maintaining or shutting down laboratories. The bill contained $1.3 billion for research, about 10 percent of what they had asked for.

Four-year public research universities, which serve 5.8 million students and employ 1.1 million faculty, conducted $52.8 billion in research in the 2018 fiscal year alone. Much of that was federally sponsored.

Peter McPherson, the president of the Association of Public and Land-Grant Universities, which represents nearly all public research institutions, noted that some member schools, such as the University of Washington, have helped fight the coronavirus.

“It’s an important enterprise and is of course particularly helpful right now,” Mr. McPherson said.

The stimulus funding will be critical for small and independent institutions that do not have the huge endowments of Ivy League schools or the government backing of large public universities.

The New Haven Independent reported this week that Quinnipiac University announced that it would temporarily cut pay for faculty and staff, citing “significant additional expenses for our university and lost revenues from programs that were canceled.”

Roger N. Casey, the president of McDaniel College in Maryland, which serves 3,000 students, said refunds and credits for food and housing would take $4 million from its budget of about $60 million.

“We’re hoping Congress can plug that hole for us, so that we can do right by our students and get that cash back in these families’ hands,” he said.

But Mr. Casey said the budgetary effect of the virus was only one concern, describing the last two weeks as “trying to put together a jigsaw puzzle, on a roller coaster in a hurricane.”

Updated Dec. 18, 2020

The latest on how the pandemic is reshaping education.

Small colleges with less affluent student bodies have “sent students back to digital deserts — and you can’t write papers on your smartphone,” he said.

Even larger institutions are feeling the strain. Elite universities worry that they cannot possibly charge tuition of $50,000 or more if all they can offer is distance learning.

Brown University announced a freeze in faculty hiring for the current and next fiscal years.

“The financial consequences resulting from the increased expenditures and the dramatic reductions in revenue provoked by the current pandemic demand prompt attention,” its leaders wrote in a letter to the community.

Harvard, whose president, Lawrence S. Bacow, tested positive for the coronavirus, is under pressure to continue paying employees, though many of their facilities, such as dining halls, will be closed through the end of the semester. The university, which has a $40 billion endowment, agreed to pay some employees for 30 days. In a statement to the Harvard Crimson newspaper, it said “the economic impact of this rapidly evolving public health crisis is one that is hitting employers of all sizes, not just higher education institutions.”

Duke University has promised to continue paying through May 31 all of its full-time employees, including contract workers in its food service facilities and in two hotels that the university owns but that are operated by vendors. As part of that effort, Duke officials said, they might have to assign some of them to new jobs.

Last week, the university issued a call to Duke employees asking for volunteers to work in its health system. In the first hour, 650 employees had agreed; by Friday, the number had risen to more than 1,000.

“We find ourselves in extraordinary times that will likely test our mettle and strain our resources in the days ahead,” said the note to colleagues from Kyle Cavanaugh, the vice president for administration and emergency coordinator.

Other college presidents worry what will happen to students if their schools do not recover.

Ann McElaney-Johnson, the president of Mount St. Mary’s University in Los Angeles, said the college was already projecting a budget loss of $2 million. With so much money going to financial aid, every source of revenue counts — down to a quarter-million dollars in parking fees, and half a million dollars in facility rental fees.

Ms. McElaney-Johnson said the college prided itself on serving a population that was “high-risk for higher ed.”

“We need to pay particular attention to these students who have put everything into making this dream of college a reality,” she said. “We’re going to get them through it, we just need help.”

Anemona Hartocollis contributed reporting from New York.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — The $2 trillion economic stabilization package agreed to by Congress and the Trump administration early Wednesday morning is the largest of its kind in modern American history, intended to respond to the coronavirus pandemic and provide direct payments and jobless benefits for individuals, money for states and a huge bailout fund for businesses.

The measure, which the Senate approved unanimously just before midnight on Wednesday, amounts to a government aid plan unprecedented in its sheer scope and size, touching on every facet of American life with the goal of salvaging and ultimately reviving a battered economy.

Its cost is hundreds of billions of dollars more than Congress provides for the entire United States federal budget for a single year, outside of social safety net programs. Administration officials said they hoped that its effect on a battered economy would be exponentially greater, as much as $4 trillion.

The legislation would send direct payments of $1,200 to millions of Americans, including those earning up to $75,000, and an additional $500 per child. It would substantially expand jobless aid, providing an additional 13 weeks and a four-month enhancement of benefits, and would extend the payments for the first time to freelancers and gig workers.

The measure would also offer $377 billion in federally guaranteed loans to small businesses and establish a $500 billion government lending program for distressed companies reeling from the impact of the crisis, including allowing the administration the ability to take equity stakes in airlines that received aid to help compensate taxpayers. It would also send $100 billion to hospitals on the front lines of the pandemic.

“This is certainly, in terms of dollars, by far and away the biggest ever, ever done,” President Trump said at the White House, where he veered from his usual partisan vitriol and praised Democrats for their work on the agreement. “That is a tremendous thing because a lot of this money goes to jobs, jobs, jobs — and families, families, families.”

The deal is the product of a marathon set of negotiations among Senate Republicans, Democrats and Mr. Trump’s team that nearly fell apart as Democrats insisted on stronger worker protections, more funds for hospitals and state governments, and tougher oversight over new loan programs intended to bail out distressed businesses.

Anticipation of the vote sent the markets higher for the second consecutive day, with the S&P 500 up a little more than 1 percent. But investors appeared to grow jittery toward the end of trading as a group of Republican senators delayed a final vote over concerns that the jobless aid was so generous that it could lead to layoffs and discourage people from working.

The last-minute snag revealed the tenuous nature of the bipartisan compromise that was at the core of the measure, which emerged from an extraordinary five-day stretch of intense negotiations between lawmakers and White House officials over how to deliver critical financial support to businesses forced to shut their doors, American families and hospitals overwhelmed by the spread of the novel coronavirus. It has already killed more than 900 people and infected more than 68,000 in the United States.

The perils of the pandemic, which by Wednesday had spread within the marble halls of the Capitol to infect lawmakers themselves, prompted Republicans to put aside their usual antipathy for big government and spearhead an effort to send cash to American families, while agreeing to astonishingly large additions to the social safety net. Democrats, for their part, dropped their routine opposition to showering tax cuts and other benefits on big corporations — all in the interest of getting a deal.

And even as they prepared to approve it, lawmakers were already discussing the likelihood that they would soon have to consider yet another package to respond to the pandemic and the toll it was taking on the United States.

The stimulus package was intended to encourage companies to keep employees on their payrolls even if their businesses have shuttered temporarily — and it increases aid to workers who are laid off anyway or have had their hours and wages cut back.

Though the bill is more than double the size of the roughly $800 billion stimulus package that Congress passed in 2009 to ease the Great Recession, analysts and economists warned it may provide only a few months of financial relief given the unknown breadth of the pandemic’s reach. With lawmakers besieged by an array of lobbyists and special-interest groups, not to mention constituents and businesses desperate for relief, the package more than doubled in size since Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader, first introduced legislation last Thursday.

“This is not a moment of celebration, but one of necessity,” Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader, said before the vote. “To all Americans, I say, ‘Help is on the way.’”

Still, some states said they needed far more government aid than it planned to provide. Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York, whose state is battling by far the largest outbreak of the virus in the United States, said Wednesday that the package was “terrible” for New York, and that the $3.1 billion earmarked to help the state with its budget gap was not nearly enough.

“We need more federal help than this bill gives us,” he said.

Speaker Nancy Pelosi of California endorsed the deal, and planned to push it through the House on Friday by voice vote — meaning that no roll call would be taken — given that the chamber is in recess and its members are scattered across the country, some in places that have imposed travel restrictions and quarantines.

“Members who want to come to the House floor to debate this bill will be able to do so,” Representative Steny H. Hoyer of Maryland, the No. 2 House Democrat, wrote in a letter to his colleagues. “In addition, we are working to ensure that those who are unable to return to Washington may express their views on this legislation remotely.”

The Senate vote unfolded as Covid-19 took its toll on that chamber, as well. Senator Rand Paul, Republican of Kentucky, was absent because he has contracted the coronavirus, while two Utah Republicans, Senators Mitt Romney and Mike Lee, remain in self-isolation out of an abundance of caution after spending time with Mr. Paul. Senator John Thune of South Dakota, the No. 2 Senate Republican, missed the vote because he was not feeling well, a spokesman said, and had returned home out of an abundance of caution.

The agreement came together after a furious final round of haggling between administration officials led by Steven Mnuchin, the Treasury secretary, and Mr. Schumer after Democrats twice blocked action on the measure as they insisted on concessions.

Once passed by both houses, the measure would be the third emergency bill approved by Congress this month to address the pandemic. Mr. Trump previously signed into law both $8.3 billion in emergency aid and a sweeping package providing paid leave, free coronavirus testing and additional aid for families affected by the pandemic.

In the final measure, most Republicans agreed to Democrats’ demands for a substantial expansion of jobless benefits, including $600 extra per week on top of the usual amount provided by states.

On Wednesday afternoon, four Republican senators said they were concerned the new benefits would be larger than some people’s wages, prompting employers to lay off workers and some employees to prefer staying home and collecting unemployment payments.

“If this is not a drafting error, then this is the worst idea I have seen in a long time,” said Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina. “We need to create a sustainable system.”

Mr. Mnuchin said the extra payments were calculated as a way to ensure that states could get money out quickly, saying that he did not believe it would create any perverse incentives. Most Americans, he said, “want to keep their jobs.”

Still, the Republicans’ threat to hold up the bill because of the issue prompted Senator Bernie Sanders, independent of Vermont and a Democratic presidential contender, to issue his own warning that he, too, would seek to block the legislation for being too lenient on corporations. Later, in a speech on the floor, Mr. Sanders said he would support the bill despite his many reservations.

Encapsulating the sentiment of many lawmakers in both parties about the hastily negotiated package, Senator Ben Sasse of Nebraska, one of the Republicans who sought to cap the jobless aid, said while he disagreed with Mr. Sanders, “I appreciate his candor in admitting that this is kind of a big crap sandwich.”

In the end, though, not a single senator voted “no.”

The hardest-fought concessions were related to the $500 billion aid fund for distressed businesses, which would include $425 billion for the Federal Reserve to leverage for loans to help broad groups of distressed companies and $75 billion for industry-specific loans to airlines and other hard-hit sectors.

Democrats insisted on stricter oversight, in the form of an inspector general and a five-person panel appointed by Congress. Republicans also agreed to require companies that accepted money through the fund to halt any stock buybacks for as long as they were receiving government assistance, plus an additional year.

The agreement also includes $350 billion for lending programs for small businesses, but only those that kept their payrolls steady through the crisis. Small businesses that pledged to keep their workers would also receive cash-flow assistance structured as federally guaranteed loans. If the employer continued to pay workers for the duration of the crisis, those loans would be forgiven.

Airlines stand to benefit from multiple provisions, according to Senator Patrick J. Toomey, Republican of Pennsylvania. He pointed to an additional $25 billion in grants for them, with the potential for equity to benefit taxpayers. He also said that $17 billion is available for direct loans to companies related to America’s national security.

Democrats won a provision to block Trump family businesses — or those of other senior government officials — from receiving loan money under the programs, though the president’s real estate empire could still benefit from other parts of the bill.

Senators also directly targeted those on the front lines of responding to the pandemic, allocating $100 billion to hospitals, more than $1 billion for virus-related research, and $150 billion for state and local governments to help them weather drop-offs in tax revenue and the costs of fighting the pandemic.

Buried in thousands of pages of dense legal text were less visible steps to mitigate the pandemic’s effects on Americans lives and retool large sections of the government to function remotely for the first time.

The bill, for example, would funnel $3.5 billion to states to prop up child care facilities and allows universities to keep paying students in federal work-study jobs even if their academic terms have been cut short.

It would allocate $100 million for additional rural broadband and $150 million for arts and humanities grants to bring cultural programming to Americans stuck at home. It would increase funding for domestic violence shelters and hotlines and set aside $425 million to deal with mental health and substance abuse disorders related to the pandemic. $400 million would become available to protect and expand voting for the 2020 election cycle.

Under other provisions, Americans affected by the virus will soon be able to temporarily withdraw up to $100,000 penalty free from their retirement accounts to use for virus-related expenses. And menstrual products will become eligible for reimbursement under flexible spending accounts.

After Wednesday’s vote, Mr. McConnell said, the Senate is not scheduled to return until April 20.

Carl Hulse and Sheryl Gay Stolberg contributed reporting from Washington, and Nicole Hong from New York.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — The White House is preparing to use software provided by the technology giant Oracle to promote unproven coronavirus treatments, including a pair of malaria drugs publicized by President Trump, potentially before the government approves their use for the outbreak, according to five senior administration officials and others familiar with the plans.

An online platform designed by Oracle, in collaboration with the White House, is still taking shape, but it is likely to be used to collect information about off-label use of the drugs, chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine, which are not yet approved by the Food and Drug Administration to treat Covid-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus.

Mr. Trump has tried to reassure Americans that what he has called a “game changer” treatment is imminent, but his language has alarmed senior health officials and public health experts, who say that the Oracle program would amount to a sprawling, crowdsourced clinical trial without the usual controls of the F.D.A.

Chloroquine has been used to treat malaria for nearly a century; the bark of the quinine tree, where the drug comes from, has been used as medicine for hundreds of years. The president has been fixated on it for days. On Monday, at his orders, the federal government was helping obtain “large quantities” of it.

The president’s promotion has pitted him against some of his top health officials, including Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, who has warned that there is only anecdotal evidence so far that the drugs may be effective in treating the coronavirus. Amy P. Abernethy, the principal deputy commissioner of the F.D.A., said on Tuesday that a randomized controlled trial is the “most appropriate way” to decide whether the drugs are a suitable treatment.

Both drugs are still being studied by the F.D.A. for their effectiveness in treating the virus.

The president’s senior adviser and son-in-law, Jared Kushner, as well as agencies within the Department of Health and Human Services such as the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services and the F.D.A., are involved in the Oracle efforts, according to two senior administration officials.

Two senior administration officials familiar with the planning say it could gather data from physicians who prescribe the malaria drugs and track patient symptoms. The officials said planners had also discussed using the platform to mail the drugs to patients involved in the trial.

The Oracle project has been heavily influenced by Dr. David B. Agus, a professor of medicine and engineering at the University of Southern California, who is working with the White House and Oracle, according to senior officials. Oracle’s co-founder, Lawrence J. Ellison, is a backer of Mr. Trump.

Dr. Agus, a CBS News medical correspondent, has campaigned for the drugs over the past week, saying on television that “the earlier you use them, the better.”

Dr. Agus has boasted to senior administration officials that he has talked about the benefits of the drugs with Mr. Trump, who has publicly counseled that medical efforts not be wedded to traditional drug trials. That has alarmed senior health officials, who see the Oracle project as a way around the rigor and consensus of the government’s drug safety oversight.

On Tuesday afternoon, Dr. Fauci met with Drs. Deborah L. Birx, the White House’s coronavirus coordinator, Robert R. Redfield, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and Stephen M. Hahn, the F.D.A. commissioner, to go over their concerns with the Oracle project and review new Chinese data that indicated the drugs have no meaningful effect.

One person familiar with the Oracle discussions said the project would be driven by science and data, not political calculations. Another person familiar with the conversations said there had been other talks between the Trump administration and television medical experts, such as Dr. Mehmet Oz, a widely watched and often criticized television personality who joined a Fox News-hosted virtual town hall with the president and Vice President Mike Pence on Tuesday to ask a question about hydroxychloroquine.

In response to the question, Mr. Pence said that patients should defer to their doctors on whether to take the drug.

On some of the president’s favorite Fox News programs in recent weeks, including Laura Ingraham’s, guests have pitched chloroquine as a coronavirus treatment. On March 14, Dr. Marc K. Siegel, a Fox News medical correspondent, said on “Justice with Judge Jeanine” that “no one is talking about" antiviral treatments, but that “we can try some of these treatments.”

Mr. Trump’s own chloroquine boosterism began as early as last Wednesday in a private Oval Office meeting, where he told a group of top officials, including Dr. Hahn, that promoting the drug would be a shot of inspiration for the public. The F.D.A., Mr. Trump said in the meeting, should promote chloroquine treatment, two senior administration officials said.

Early that morning, and to the surprise of top officials at the F.D.A., Mr. Trump wrote on Twitter that he would be holding a news conference “to discuss very important news from the F.D.A. concerning the Chinese Virus!” Pleading with the White House, officials at the F.D.A. were able to hold it off, according to a senior administration official, forcing Mr. Trump to take his message to the next day’s coronavirus task force news briefing, where he told reporters that chloroquine would be distributed to “large groups of people” even before the government had concluded studying its safety and effectiveness.

“We’re going to be able to make that drug available almost immediately,” the president said.

At the same Thursday news conference, Dr. Hahn appeared to walk back the promise, saying it was the responsibility of the F.D.A. to make sure products are “safe and effective,” and that “what’s also important is not to provide false hope, but to provide hope.”

A spokesman for the F.D.A. said that the agency has been working on therapeutics “from the beginning of this pandemic,” and has been keeping the White House and Mr. Trump apprised, including on hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine.

Proponents of the drugs have cited Chinese and French reports that indicated they have been successful in treating coronavirus patients. But that research did not have control groups or other measures needed to determine whether a drug actually works.

One article published in the International Journal of Antimicrobial Agents said that a combination of hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin, a common antibiotic, appeared to help patients. But that study involved giving hydroxychloroquine to just 26 people with confirmed coronavirus infections, including some with no symptoms. Only six of the patients were also given azithromycin. Some in the group did not even complete the study, including three who were sent to intensive care, one who died, and one who stopped treatment because of nausea.

Dr. Joshua M. Sharfstein, a vice dean at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health and a former principal deputy commissioner at the F.D.A., said that the only way to know whether chloroquine works as a coronavirus treatment is through a high-quality clinical trial.

“I think there’s a major misconception in this country that getting good evidence means red tape,” he said. “Getting good evidence is knowing the difference between something that works and something that doesn’t.”

On Monday, an Arizona man died and his wife was hospitalized after they ingested chloroquine phosphate, a substance used frequently in aquariums to clean fish tanks, according to Banner Health, a hospital system based in Phoenix which treated the couple. The woman told NBC News that she took the substance, which she used on koi fish, after seeing Mr. Trump discuss it on television.

“Trump kept saying it was basically pretty much a cure,” the woman said.

Dr. Daniel Brooks, a medical director with the Banner Poison and Drug Information Center, said on Monday, “It’s incredibly dangerous and foolish for people to be doing this.”

“This is not going to be a magic pill for us to get us through this,” he added.

Some of the biggest pharmaceutical manufacturers, including Teva and Mylan, are ramping up production of hydroxychloroquine. Rising Pharmaceuticals, a manufacturer of chloroquine, has said it is also increasing production. And Bayer announced that it was donating millions of pills of chloroquine to the U.S. government.

The demand for the drugs has caused a nationwide crisis for people with conditions reliant on hydroxychloroquine, like lupus and rheumatoid arthritis. Patients have described difficulty locating the drug at pharmacies, and hospitals have rushed to stash the treatments in an effort to treat severely ill patients.

Doctors have begun hoarding it by writing prescriptions for themselves and family members, according to pharmacy boards in states across the country.

“The last thing I want to happen now is that, especially since President Trump and others have been mentioning this by name, is that people will go out and ask their doctors to write prescriptions, just in case,” said Onisis Stefas, the chief pharmacy officer for New York-based Northwell Health’s 23 hospitals.

The stockpiling has become so worrisome in Idaho, Kentucky, Ohio, Nevada, Oklahoma, North Carolina, and Texas that the boards in those states have issued emergency restrictions or guidelines on how the drugs can be dispensed at pharmacies.

David McCabe contributed reporting from Washington, and Katie Thomas from Chicago.

<|endoftext|>

MIAMI — Florida has a message for New Yorkers: Please don’t visit. And if you do, prepare to sit in quarantine or risk jail. Hawaii, which also thrives on tourism, is asking visitors to stay away for a month. And Alaska is requiring a 14-day quarantine for anyone entering from, as Alaskans put it, Outside.

It is a rare circumstance in the United States, a country where travel between states is generally welcomed and often only noticed in counts of tourism visits, that states are suddenly looking for ways to discourage residents of other states from coming into theirs.

Governors, who also now find themselves competing with one another for urgently needed medical resources like ventilators, say they are placing restrictions on visitors to save their own people, trying to prevent the contagious virus from spreading further into their states. They are on particular alert for travelers from New York City, which has far more confirmed cases than any other area in the country.

And in a spiraling health crisis that has largely been managed by individual governors rather than a cohesive federal government, there has been little to stop them from making their own rules.

On Tuesday, Gov. Ron DeSantis of Florida, a Republican, signed an executive order requiring a 14-day quarantine of anyone who had arrived from the New York region over the past three weeks. All new arrivals will have to report names of people they have contact with to public health officials so they can trace those people as well, he said.

“Maybe they haven’t even shown symptoms, but they could be infected,” Mr. DeSantis said. “After all the hard work, we don’t want it to now get seeded as people flee the hot zone.”

Last week, Gov. David Ige of Hawaii, a Democrat, did the unthinkable in a state that lives on entertaining visitors by asking travelers to postpone trips for 30 days.

“The actions I’m announcing today may seem extreme to some of you, and we know that it will have negative effects to our economy,” Mr. Ige said. “But we are confident that taking aggressive actions now will allow us to have a quicker recovery when this crisis is over.”

Gov. Mike Dunleavy of Alaska, a Republican, enacted one of the strictest measures on Monday when he ordered almost everyone arriving in Alaska, whether they live there or are visiting, to self-quarantine for 14 days and monitor themselves for symptoms of the virus. The state has 42 diagnosed cases — a smaller number of confirmed infections than in all but three other states — as of Wednesday afternoon.

“If you are a resident, your designated quarantine location is your residence,” the order said. “If you are a visitor or worker, your designated quarantine location is your hotel room or rented lodging.”

Historians said it was difficult to recall a time in modern American history when states imposed quarantine restrictions on residents of certain other states.

David M. Oshinsky, a medical historian, said he was not familiar with individual states taking such measures, but that during several polio epidemics in the 20th century, local officials forbade “outsiders” from entering their jurisdictions.

“In 1916, when newspapers blamed Italian immigrants in New York City for starting a serious polio outbreak, several surrounding municipalities used heavily armed policemen to patrol the roads and rail stations in search of fleeing New Yorkers and their children,” he said.

Other tensions — and some neighborly overtures — were rippling on state borders around the country as alarm over the virus continued to rise.

The $2 trillion stimulus package that was being debated by the Senate on Wednesday also had the potential to pit states against one another. Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York, a Democrat, slammed it as “terrible” for the state, saying the $3.8 billion it would receive was “a drop in the bucket” given how hard New Yorkers had been hit by the virus.

The aggressive quarantine measures in Florida were met with skepticism by many residents who fault the governor for taking steps aimed at arriving New Yorkers instead of adopting stricter restrictions throughout the state. But the White House Coronavirus Task Force also has recommended that people who have passed through or left New York City place themselves into 14-day quarantine.

Governor DeSantis has resisted calling on Floridians to stay in their own homes, unlike in New York, where Governor Cuomo issued a statewide call for residents to only leave their homes if necessary.

“Florida is pointing at New York, and everybody is pointing at Florida,” said Billy Corben, a Miami filmmaker who directed “Cocaine Cowboys” and has extensively chronicled the state’s colorful underbelly. “Because Florida.”

Mr. Corben pointed to the masses of young people who crowded the Sunshine State’s beaches for spring break in recent weeks, ignoring calls for social distancing. Miami Beach and Fort Lauderdale eventually closed down their shorelines, and other jurisdictions followed suit, but their efforts might have come too late.

Mayor Dan Gelber of Miami Beach, a Democrat whose city was the first in the state to formally issue a stay-at-home order on Monday, applauded the governor’s quarantine order of New Yorkers. At least 141 of Florida’s nearly 2,000 coronavirus cases have been linked to travel to New York, New Jersey or Connecticut, including about 8 percent of known cases in Palm Beach County.

“They’re coming from an area where it seems much more rampant than here,” Mr. Gelber said. “I worry that people coming here from New York are coming because they don’t like the stay-at-home order and they’re just looking to ride it out anywhere else. We cannot be the resort you go to right now.”

Some people who traveled to Florida acknowledged what they were leaving behind. Stephen Moosbrugger, who received quarantine orders when he landed at Miami International Airport on Tuesday evening on an American Airlines flight from La Guardia Airport in New York, had hoped to be reunited with his wife in their Miami Beach apartment. He changed his mind after calling his son from the airport.

“He said, ‘Well, Dad, that’s really stupid,’” Mr. Moosbrugger, 64, recalled with a chuckle. “It’s a shame when your child is lecturing the father.”

So Mr. Moosbrugger, a certified public accountant who splits his time between Miami Beach and the Upper West Side of New York, hunted for a hotel room and found one in downtown Miami. He plans to ride out his quarantine there, calling his wife several times a day to chat.

“Am I irritated? Well, I’m incurring an expense that otherwise I wouldn’t have had to incur, but I get it,” he said. “If we can flatten this — in New York, it’s just surreal. This is another place that has a chance to have a really crazy infection rate because of all the people that come here.”

A Florida Department of Health form that passengers must fill out requires them to list family members they are traveling with and to sign a page acknowledging that violating the 14-day quarantine can be punishable with up to 60 days of prison and a $500 fine.

Mr. DeSantis said last week that he had urged President Trump, a legal resident of Florida, to restrict domestic travel between New York and Florida. More than 190 daily direct flights were arriving in Florida from New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, according to the governor. When no restrictions came, Mr. DeSantis said, he ordered quarantines.

Similarly, Gov. Wanda Vázquez of Puerto Rico imposed a two-week quarantine on all arriving passengers after her request to ground all domestic and international flights to the island went unheeded. And more states followed on Wednesday, with Gov. Larry Hogan of Maryland, a Republican, saying that anyone who had recently been in the New York City region must quarantine for at least two weeks after arriving in Maryland. And Gov. Henry McMaster of South Carolina, also a Republican, asked all visitors who planned to stay in the state for two or more nights to quarantine for two weeks.

Medical resources have become another area of tension among the states. Gov. J.B. Pritzker of Illinois, a Democrat who has been a frequent critic of the Trump administration, said this week that he had found himself in the extraordinary position of competing against other states and federal agencies for medical supplies, a complaint echoed by other state officials.

“The truth is that I was on the phone yesterday talking to companies and here’s what I ran into: In one case we’re competing for ventilators with FEMA and the federal government,” Mr. Pritzker said in a television interview. “So Illinois is bidding for ventilators against the federal government. In another case, we were bidding against foreign countries and other states.”

And when the mayors of two northern Idaho cities, Coeur d’Alene and Post Falls, noticed that Washington State residents were flooding over the Idaho border last weekend, apparently because of the Idaho cities’ more relaxed rules, they swiftly banned bars and restaurants from serving dine-in meals.

Farther south, Mayor Randy Hibberd of Weiser, Idaho, a city of about 5,300 people, said his city, which borders Oregon, was lucky to be far away from that state’s more populous regions, where confirmed coronavirus cases have increased. He said he was concerned about other Idaho residents driving from Boise to his city to raid the grocery stores.

“There isn’t any talk of restricting travel,” Mr. Hibberd said. “Eastern Oregon is essentially part of western Idaho.”

He said he had gone to a doctor’s appointment in Boise the other day, a trip that took him briefly into Oregon.

“I was asked when I got there if I’d been out of state and I said ‘Yeah, this morning,’” he said, laughing. “You can’t close things down.”

Patricia Mazzei reported from Miami, Julie Bosman from Chicago and Nicholas Bogel-Burroughs from New York.

<|endoftext|>

Dr. Elizabeth Mitchell had just come off back-to-back work shifts in the emergency room at Boston Medical Center last week and was not sure how to think about what she had experienced. In almost three decades as an emergency physician, she, like her colleagues, was used to feeling invincible. She had regularly treated patients facing horrific trauma. She had grabbed gloves and rushed toward the smoke while working during the Boston Marathon bombing.

But as the coronavirus began to explode on the East Coast, the fear and anxiety in her emergency department was something entirely new. “This feels for the very first time there is actually a threat to me as a physician,” Dr. Mitchell said. “The nurses feel the same way.”

In hospitals across the country, the lack of widespread testing and the severe shortage of protective gear have left health care workers fretting for their own safety, and for the public’s. The virus is as invisible as it is dangerous. “You can’t see it, and you don’t know what is going to happen,” Dr. Mitchell said.

One recent morning after a long shift in the E.R., Dr. Mitchell took a walk in her neighborhood and noticed a daffodil blooming, a reminder of spring’s renewal. It contrasted with so much in the landscape around her that had changed — neighbors closeted behind closed doors, the protective armor she had to wear to work, all the uncertainty in the air.

After her walk, Dr. Mitchell sat down and wrote a poem.

She had been turning to writing for years, publishing essays in the Annals of Emergency Medicine and at times reading poetry to the residents she helps trains. Poetry, Dr. Mitchell said, allows doctors to become better listeners. “It speaks to the art of medicine,” she said, “versus the science of medicine.”



by Dr. Elizabeth Mitchell

This is the apocalypseA daffodil has poked its head upfrom the dirt and openedsunny arms to bluer skiesyet I am filled withdark and anxious dreadas theaters close as travel ends andgrocery stores display their empty rowswhere toilet paper liquid bleachand bags of flour stood in upright ranks.

My stomach twists and fingers shakeas I prepare to work the battlegroundthe place I’ve always loved and felt at homeis now a field of droplets sprayed across a roomor lurking on a handle or a sink to find their wayinside our trusting hands or mouths or eyesthe ones that touch you when you’re sickspeak soothing words and seek the answer to your pain.

This is the apocalypseas spring begins againand brightly colored flowersdeploy in my back yardthe neighbors walk their dogsand march along the quiet streetsI stretch my purple gloves on steady handsI tie my yellow gown behind my backmy hair inside a blue bouffantmy mouth and nose and eyes arestill and calm inside their waiting shields.This is the apocalypse.

Have you felt moved to poetry by the coronavirus crisis? We’d like to hear your favorite verses in the comments.

Additional Image Credit: Louie Schwartzberg/Getty Images

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — Restaurants and retailers will get a tweak to federal tax law they have been seeking for more than a year that could save them $15 billion. Community banks are being granted their long-held wish of being freed to reduce the amount of capital they have to hold in reserve.

And for-profit colleges will be able to keep federal loan money from students who drop out because of the coronavirus.

Tucked into the largest bailout in United States history — a $2 trillion federal stimulus package agreed to by congressional leaders and the White House early Wednesday in an effort to reduce the economic devastation of the coronavirus outbreak — are a range of provisions that stand to benefit specific industries and interest groups.

Even the fine print in a near-final 880-page version of the bill has fine print. Democrats proudly announced that they had won agreement on language to block President Trump, other government officials and their families from receiving assistance from a $500 billion fund to be administered by the Treasury Department.

But it turns out that the provision might not preclude funds from going to companies owned by the family of Mr. Trump’s son-in-law and White House adviser, Jared Kushner, while Mr. Trump’s companies would not be barred from benefiting from other elements of the bill intended to help broad swaths of American business.

For example, certain hotel owners, even those employing thousands of people, will be eligible for small-business loans, a provision that could potentially benefit Mr. Trump’s company to help to continue to pay wages for his employees. The Trump Organization could also benefit from the $15 billion change to the tax code won by restaurants and retailers.

The legislation, which passed the Senate and could be passed by the House and signed into law by Mr. Trump by the end of the week, is intended primarily to put money in the hands of many households and prop up especially hard-hit industries like airlines.

But its sheer size and the rushed way it was put together made it an irresistible target for lobbyists, who launched a frenzied effort to insert into the must-pass legislation provisions their clients wanted, some of which had a timely rationale and others of which were largely unconnected to the coronavirus crisis.

This lobbying push was unlike any other, as social distancing measures intended to limit the spread of the virus among lawmakers and their staffs left the Capitol eerily quiet. Lobbyists instead pressed their causes to staff members and lawmakers over the phone, or via email.

“We went to McConnell’s people, we went to Schumer’s people, and Pelosi’s and McCarthy’s people — we pinged them all,” said Rachelle B. Bernstein, a lobbyist and tax counsel at the National Retail Federation, which pressed successfully for the $15-billion-a-year change in federal tax law.

While some industries and companies are benefiting from provisions tailored for them, others appear certain to get a piece of the pie through more general components of the bill, from the $454 billion general purpose fund for businesses and state and local governments to the $50 billion earmarked for airlines and $8 billion for air cargo carriers.

The deal specifically sets aside $17 billion for “businesses critical to maintaining national security” — a category seen as intended at least partly for Boeing, the troubled aircraft manufacturer and Pentagon contractor, whose name appears nowhere in the bill.

“We’ll be helping Boeing,” Mr. Trump said Tuesday evening. “We’ll be helping the airlines, the cruise lines.”

As with any complex piece of legislation, this one will create winners and losers.

Despite the effort by Democrats to limit access by top federal officials and members of Congress to the bailout funds, the law would still leave room for Mr. Trump to benefit. At least two of the provisions, intended to help the hotel and restaurant industries, could potentially provide financial help to the Trump Organization.

A spokesman for the Trump Organization did not respond to a request for comment. Mr. Trump declined to respond to a question this week about whether his family business intended to take advantage of any of the tax breaks or other benefits included in the legislation.

“I don’t know,” Mr. Trump said at a news conference on Sunday. “I just don’t know what the government assistance would be for what I have. I have hotels.”

Many of these special-interest provisions would be impossible for a casual reader of the legislation to identify. For example, on Page 15 of the bill, there is a section with the title “Business Concerns With More Than 1 Physical Location.” It says this change in federal law will apply to companies that fit “a North American Industry Classification System code beginning with 72” — a reference that turns out to mean the hotel and restaurant industry.

The provision says that if a company owns multiple hotels, even if the overall hotel or restaurant chain has more than 500 employees — the limit to qualify for treatment as a small business — it will still be able to take advantage of the small-business benefits offered in the rescue package.

That means loans from the federal government worth up to 2.5 times the firm’s monthly payroll that will not have to be repaid if the company uses them to keep paying employees during any coronavirus shutdowns.

Representatives from the American Hotel & Lodging Association reached out to Republicans and Democrats to push them to insert the language, arguing that it would allow the federal assistance to cover an additional 33,000 hotels, with a total of about one million employees.

The large corporations that own the big brands — like Marriott or Hilton — would not be eligible. But any individual hotel, including from one of these brands, that has fewer than 500 employees would be. Many hotels are owned by franchisees.

The provision could benefit the Trump Organization, which operates a relatively small chain, with six hotels in the United States in cities including New York, Washington and Chicago. Several Trump hotels are members of the trade association.

A representative for the trade group said executives at the Trump Organization were not involved in the lobbying effort. Representatives of the Trump Organization did not respond to a question on Wednesday about the provision.

The tweak to the tax code sought by the nation’s retailers and grocers could mean $15 billion a year worth of tax savings for hotels, restaurants, supermarkets and other retailers. Groups representing those industries separately intervened with both Mr. Trump and leaders on Capitol Hill to push lawmakers to include it in the final package.

Updated Dec. 18, 2020

The latest on how the pandemic is reshaping education.

The provision could potentially benefit Mr. Trump’s companies, among many others, by allowing them to immediately write off money spent on renovations at hotels or restaurants, instead of having to take the deduction over 37 years.

Industry lobbyists have been pushing for the change for more than a year. They have called it a technical correction to the 2017 tax legislation that Mr. Trump signed into law. The provision is simply called “Technical Amendments Regarding Qualified Improvement Property.”

It would allow hotels, restaurants and retailers that have spent money fixing up their properties in the last two years to accelerate the way they write off those expenses, effectively giving them an immediate tax refund, Ms. Bernstein, the industry lobbyist said. They could then use the refund to help cover bills during the crisis. The special tax benefit would be retroactive to 2018 and would last for at least three more years, before it is gradually phased out.

“If you let us amend our returns, we will be getting billions back and it will help us pay our employees and our rents and stay in business until consumers can come back into our stores,” Ms. Bernstein said, echoing the argument she said she made to lawmakers on Capitol Hill.

Meanwhile, the provision inserted by Democrats to block the families of government officials from receiving certain assistance might not exempt the companies owned by the family of Mr. Kushner.

While the provision expressly bars such funds from going to companies controlled by “the spouse, child, son-in-law or daughter-in-law” of the president and other officials, in order for the prohibition to kick in, the person in question would have to “directly or indirectly” own or control 20 percent or more of a company. Mr. Kushner rarely owns that much in his family firm’s various real estate projects, according to a person familiar with the family’s business arrangements. The ownership is usually divided between Mr. Kushner, his three siblings, his two parents and various outside investors.

Mr. Kushner’s representatives did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

Another business that could benefit from the bill is for-profit colleges, which have been championed by some Republicans, but targeted as predatory by Democrats and advocates for student borrowers.

A provision in the bill would allow all colleges to retain federal funds allocated to help educate qualifying students, even if the students in question dropped out because of coronavirus-related emergencies. While the provision applies to all colleges, critics of for-profit colleges contend that, because those schools tend to have higher dropout rates, they would be able to retain more of the money they collect via federal loans to their students than would traditional nonprofit colleges.

“What’s happening now is causing a crisis for all sectors of higher ed, and I understand the intent, but it would disproportionately help for-profit schools because their dropout rates are higher than other segments of higher ed,” said Toby Merrill, the founder of the Project on Predatory Student Lending.

Both parties jammed in provisions to help favored constituencies. The deal included $25 million for the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington — money that has generated complaints from some conservatives.

It also includes $7.5 million for the Smithsonian Institution, as well as $75 million each for the National Endowment for the Arts and the National Endowment for the Humanities to provide grants to arts organizations, museums and libraries during the coronavirus outbreak.

The bill also contains a six-month extension of federal funding through the end of November for abstinence-only education programs favored by social conservatives who are a critical Republican voting bloc. The extension is coupled with one for sex education programs that provide information about birth control and safe sex, which are supported by reproductive rights groups that tend to back Democrats.

Provisions sought by the nation’s smaller banks, a powerful constituency, were also included in the bill. One change would allow those banks to have lower requirements for capital reserves, the buffer that financial institutions are required to keep on hand to ensure they remain solvent if they run into trouble.

The industry late last year had fought for the change, and lost. This time the banks used the disaster to reopen the fight and get the lower capital requirements they wanted, arguing that it would allow them to do more lending to small businesses during the coronavirus emergency. The change would remain in effect as long as the virus emergency continued, although the industry is already discussing looking for ways to make it permanent.

Jesse Drucker contributed reporting from New York.

<|endoftext|>

Think of it as Super Postponed Day.

June 2 had been an afterthought on the Democratic primary calendar. Ever since Joseph R. Biden Jr. seized the mantle of front-runner, voters in New Jersey and a few other states scheduled to vote that day assumed the Democratic horse race would be over before their primaries rolled around.

But with numerous states pushing back voting to June 2 because of the coronavirus pandemic, the date has gained sudden prominence. It now confers a huge bounty of delegates, second only to Super Tuesday in early March, with Indiana, Pennsylvania and others moving to hold their primaries on the first Tuesday in June.

Although Mr. Biden has built an all but insurmountable lead, June 2 — which is a long 10 weeks away — will be his first chance to clinch the presidential nomination. Only then would the former vice president have a definitive reason to press for the withdrawal of Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, who has shown no inclination to leave a race that feels frozen in place.

Some Democratic strategists see possible perils in the delay. Having to wait until June 2 for the next major chapter in the nominating race largely deprives Mr. Biden of a chance to rack up interim victories that would bring media attention; President Trump, meanwhile, is promoting his leadership in a global pandemic. A Monmouth University Poll on Tuesday showed Mr. Biden with a three-point lead over Mr. Trump among registered voters nationally, 48 percent to 45 percent, an edge the pollsters called “negligible.”

As the Democratic nominee-in-waiting, Mr. Biden may simply have to wait longer.

“This idea apparently being floated by the Sanders campaign that Bernie can stay in the race and accumulate delegates without harming Biden’s chances of winning in November is delusional,” said J.J. Balaban, a Democratic strategist in Pennsylvania. The lengthy pause in the primary and Mr. Sanders’s reluctance to step aside are distractions, Mr. Balaban said, from the need for Democrats to refocus on the general election race, in which Mr. Trump has a head start raising money and coalescing supporters.

Michael Soliman, a Democratic strategist in New Jersey, said the delay might not be all bad if it concentrates the minds of voters on the need for change in the White House. “As this crisis causes more states to push back their primaries, New Jersey voters will not only be reminded about the need for strong and steady leadership, but they will finally be in a position to play a meaningful role in securing the nomination for Joe Biden,” he said.

On Tuesday, Delaware became the latest state to move its primary, originally scheduled for April 28, to June 2, under an executive order by Gov. John Carney. Pennsylvania’s Legislature passed a bill on Wednesday to likewise reschedule the state’s primary from April 28 to June 2, which Gov. Tom Wolf is expected to sign by the end of the week.

Delaware and Pennsylvania would bring to six the number of states to move primaries to June 2, including Connecticut, Indiana, Maryland and Rhode Island. The newcomers join the five primaries originally scheduled that day: New Jersey, Montana, New Mexico, South Dakota and the District of Columbia. (Inevitably, the date seems destined to be stamped the “Acela Primary” for its new regional tilt.)

Ohio, which canceled its primary scheduled for March 17 because of the coronavirus, also has its sights on June 2. The date is one week before the June 9 deadline that the Democratic National Committee has set for states to hold primaries.

Election officials in New York, which is emerging as a hot spot of infections, are considering delaying their presidential primary from April 28 to June 23. A group representing New York’s election commissioners on Tuesday called for the primary to be moved to June 23, the date of another statewide vote, and to allow all voters to request absentee ballots. As the D.N.C. rules currently stand, New York could forfeit some delegates at the national convention for voting so late.

In all, 822 pledged delegates would be at stake on June 2 if all the states eyeing that date follow through. The D.N.C. has said a candidate needs 1,991 to clinch the nomination.

Mr. Biden currently leads, with 1,214 pledged delegates to Mr. Sanders’s 910. The delegate math has become nearly prohibitive for Mr. Sanders; to overtake Mr. Biden, he would need to win the remaining states by about 20 percentage points.

Few of the remaining states on the map feature the voting blocs, chiefly large numbers of Hispanics, where Mr. Sanders has done well. He has lost in a series of states where he was thought to have the advantage, notably Michigan, Minnesota and Texas.

With the coronavirus outbreak, the Vermont senator has turned away almost entirely from conventional campaigning, instead converting his campaign apparatus to rally his liberal supporters around fighting for his vision of health care during the emergency. On Tuesday night he streamed a “coronavirus town hall” featuring health experts, a musical guest and Representative Pramila Jayapal of Washington, a chair of the Congressional Progressive Caucus.

Four years ago, Mr. Sanders never formally dropped out of the primary race even after Hillary Clinton became the presumptive nominee on June 7. (Mr. Sanders endorsed Mrs. Clinton a month later, just before the national convention.)

Mr. Biden has struggled to adapt to the new political landscape in which there are no more scheduled debates or live rallies, and Mr. Trump has seized the national spotlight with daily briefings from the White House. A Biden appearance from his Delaware basement on Monday, in which he criticized Mr. Trump for not acting like the “wartime president” he claims to be, was not picked up in real time by any of the major cable news channels.

Mr. Biden appeared again from his new home studio in a round of television news interviews on Tuesday. On MSNBC, he said that he opposed calling off any elections; on CNN, he said that he was “staying in place, not gathering at events” and that anyone who enters his home, Secret Service agents included, wears masks and gloves.

He was asked about Mr. Sanders’s “ramping up” for primaries in New York and elsewhere.

“I think that’s his decision,” Mr. Biden said.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — For more than 18 years, the United States military has been defined by Washington’s wars overseas, with hundreds of thousands of troops rotating through far-flung hot spots, fighting battles in places many Americans can barely pronounce, let alone point to on a map.

But as the coronavirus pandemic sweeps across the United States and an anxious public looks for a response from its armed forces, many military and civilian leaders at the Pentagon whose careers have been established by the long wars are suddenly trying to answer one question: What is the American military’s role in trying to safeguard the country from a new enemy, one that is now taking a deadly toll within its borders?

Some military officials say the Defense Department can do all of it: prepare for a potential war with China and Russia, fight the Islamic State and rush field hospitals to Seattle and New York. But the department’s actions say otherwise, as the Pentagon’s top leadership has yet to find a balance between protecting Americans at home versus preparing to wage war abroad if so ordered.

“The president says it’s a war. It is a war,” Gov. Andrew Cuomo, Democrat of New York, said on Tuesday in describing how to fight the pandemic. “Well, act like it’s a war.”

But the Pentagon has yet to join the fight with full force.

In a message to his Marine Expeditionary Force on the West Coast last week, Lt. Gen. Joseph L. Osterman described his priorities, encapsulating the Pentagon’s stance on the virus thus far.

“This is all about force preservation, readiness and being good neighbors to our adjacent communities,” he said in an email obtained by The New York Times.

The Pentagon’s decision to initially distance itself from the country — much like General Osterman’s directive to look inward before helping Americans outside his bases — has made the U.S. military’s response piecemeal, said Stanley McChrystal, the retired general and former commander of U.S. troops in Afghanistan until he was fired in 2010 by President Barack Obama.

“My sense is that the mission to defend America against enemies, foreign and domestic, should be interpreted to include even unconventional threats like the ongoing pandemic,” General McChrystal wrote in an email. “I believe they can, should, and ultimately will be required to do much more.”

For militaries around the world, a national crisis can be a time of reckoning, thrusting uniformed service members into daily, face-to-face contact with those they are sworn to protect. As the coronavirus spread in Italy, soldiers deployed for general security purposes, but a few were sent to the north of the country to enforce the nationwide lockdown.

But there are pitfalls. In Spain, it was the military that discovered that patients in a nursing home had been abandoned amid the pandemic. But that led to a spitting match between the country’s minister of defense, who criticized health workers for leaving their posts, and the union representing those workers, who said they had not been given enough equipment by the government.

In Liberia, during the 2014 Ebola crisis, the president deployed the country’s military to enforce a sudden, mandatory quarantine of a densely populated slum, with disastrous results: Protests broke out, and soldiers fired live rounds into the crowd. A 15-year-old was shot and killed.

The American military is recognized as a formidable fighting force, with logistical, communications and supply networks that excel in extremis. The people now calling on the military to help think more can and should be done, as a number of governors, mayors and municipal officials in besieged cities across the United States have made television appearances to plead for aid from the Defense Department.

“The military has extraordinary medical capacity of its own that’s been honed in fighting wars,” Mayor Bill de Blasio of New York told NBC’s “Meet the Press” on Sunday. “They can handle any situation. All that great personnel who are medically trained should be sent to places where this crisis is deep, like New York, right now.”

In particular, the armed services know how to set up command-and-control centers, how to stock warehouses and how to transport doctors, nurses and medical materials around the country, and quickly.

Gen. Mark A. Milley, the country’s top military officer, said on Monday that two Army field hospitals would arrive in New York and Seattle by Thursday, bringing to each city the ability to care for an additional 248 patients. The hospitals, one to each city, will have 11 ventilators each.

Other mobile combat hospitals are prepared to deploy and may soon be headed to stricken areas, General Milley said. The Mercy, the Navy hospital ship based in San Diego, is bound for Los Angeles with its 1,000 beds.

But critics say that is not enough, and that the deployments do not scratch the surface of what one of the world’s most powerful militaries — and the country’s top logistical organization — is able to accomplish. The Pentagon has “lost precious time, especially in terms of planning a military response,” said Paul Eaton, a retired major general and veteran of the Iraq war, who now serves as a senior adviser at VOTEVETS.ORG. “Now we have a situation where the military response is like whack-a-mole, trying to respond to hot spots as they pop up.”

He said the Pentagon “must unleash the military planners to plan now for a wider response, to ensure every area gets what it needs, without putting undue strain on our resources.”

The military is not at the forefront of the country’s efforts to fight the coronavirus for many reasons.

For one, President Trump has yet to announce any sort of nationwide quarantine, so there is little the active-duty military can or should do to enforce recommendations for social distancing. Pentagon officials are also acutely aware of the image of uniformed troops marching into American cities; they have dealt in recent weeks with rampant rumors on social media of martial law.

With the response to the virus largely done on a state-by-state basis so far, that has meant an increased role for the National Guard. About 9,000 National Guard troops across the country have been called up.

Defense Secretary Mark T. Esper has opted for a slower approach than some of the Defense Department’s service secretaries and chiefs of staff. In particular, he has lagged behind the Army in putting some measures in place.

Last week, Mr. Esper rejected proposals from the Army and Navy to halt or at least slow down basic training for new recruits as a way to mitigate the spread of the coronavirus across the ranks. Mr. Esper’s decision, first reported by The Washington Post, means that new recruit training continues even as the Pentagon has halted virtually all domestic travel for the next eight weeks.

Similarly, the Army this month stopped deployments of soldiers to countries hit hard by the coronavirus, days before Mr. Esper ordered the other services to do so. Both episodes reflect a bifurcated response that has been in play since Mr. Esper warned American military commanders overseas not to make any decisions related to the coronavirus that might surprise the White House or run afoul of Mr. Trump’s messaging on the growing health challenge.

The Pentagon has issued “extensive guidance to our force” and given commanders leeway to properly safeguard their troops, Alyssa A. Farah, a Pentagon spokeswoman, said in a statement.

The Defense Department is also “contributing extensively to the Whole of Government response to COVID, offering up extensive resources ranging from our hospital ships, to medical supplies from our strategic stockpiles, to helping with construction of field hospitals,” Ms. Farah wrote.

Mr. Esper’s restrained response so far is to a certain extent “appropriate, and probably expected, especially given so many vacancies on the civilian side,” said Derek Chollet, a former assistant secretary of defense.

“There is an important psychological factor of reassuring folks at home and making clear to those abroad that we remain resilient,” he said.

But a different leader, such as the former defense secretaries Donald H. Rumsfeld, Robert M. Gates, Leon E. Panetta and Jim Mattis “would be more of a public command presence,” Mr. Chollet said.

This tension is understandable: Mr. Esper does not want the military to be blindsided by adversaries who could take advantage of the viral outbreak. Moreover, some Pentagon officials have expressed concerns that the closer the military becomes involved in day-to-day interactions with people who have tested positive for the virus, the greater the chances the military’s largely young force falls ill. And that undercuts military readiness.

Kathleen H. Hicks, a former top Pentagon official in the Obama administration who is now at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington, said it was essential that the Defense Department ensure that its forces remain protected from the coronavirus — but within reason.

In many ways, this approach has spread confusion and discord in the ranks as various commands have interpreted the Pentagon’s directives as they see fit. Deployments are in limbo, and troops in combat zones have little idea when they will return. Even if they knew, it is uncertain where they would spend weeks of quarantine; base officials have previously used ad hoc tent camps or cramped excess housing.

One example is a Marine unit that was sent to the American Embassy in Baghdad in the days before the Jan. 3 drone strike on Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani, one of Iran’s top military commanders. Those Marines are now stranded in Kuwait because their return flights to the United States were canceled.

In a briefing to the unit, military officials said the flights were “postponed” and asked those in attendance not to call their longer deployment an “extension,” according to a Marine who was present.

The unit, he said, was not pleased with the requested distinction.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — Nations reeling from conflict, poverty and deficient health care will be unable to contain the coronavirus without significant international assistance, risking that the disease will ricochet back to recovering populations in a deadly global cycle, the United Nations warned in a new $2 billion appeal to combat the pandemic.

Even as they called on the world to fund defenses against the virus, U.N. officials also urged continuing donations to humanitarian crises to prevent those nations from becoming even more vulnerable to the disease.

“Countries battle their own catastrophes at home” and “are rightly prioritizing their citizens,” Mark Lowcock, the U.N. under secretary general for humanitarian affairs and emergency relief, said in an interview on Tuesday. “But the hard truth is, in order to protect their own people, it’s going to be smart to help the poorest countries engage for this response, too.”

The money to confront the coronavirus in 53 nations suffering from instability — in South America, Africa the Middle East and Asia — is not immediately available. Funds will be raised over the next nine months as U.N. agencies and private aid organizations combine efforts for the appeal, and for a new response plan that will be released Wednesday during an online news briefing. Details of the plan were provided in advance to The New York Times.

In Africa, which the plan identified as among the most vulnerable regions, health services are unequipped to manage coronavirus patients.

The plan cited reports of only 25 beds in intensive care units in Malawi’s public hospitals, serving a population in 17 million, and only six beds in Chad, along with a single available ventilator in the entire country. There are no beds in the intensive care unit of the main infectious diseases hospital in Harare, the capital of Zimbabwe, the plan found.

Attacks on hospitals and medical workers — including in Syria, Yemen, Afghanistan, Libya, Gaza, Nigeria and Burkina Faso — have severely degraded health care in conflict zones, the plan said.

Refugees fleeing political unrest and poverty in Venezuela have overwhelmed medical systems in neighboring states, as have Rohingya Muslims who faced persecution in Myanmar and escaped to Bangladesh, Mr. Lowcock said.

Palestinians living in refugee camps across the Middle East are at high risk of catching the coronavirus in their densely populated living areas. The U.N. relief agency for Palestinian refugees issued a $14 million emergency appeal last week to respond to the virus during what it called its worst financial crisis ever; the Trump administration cut its funding of about $60 million annually to the organization in 2018.

But the plan also presents a dire scenario if donor nations reduce aid to humanitarian crises worldwide, like famine in Yemen and Syria’s worsening civil war. An estimated 100 million people receive U.N. assistance for a raft of urgent needs — from staving off measles and cholera to preventing malnourishment.

Without continued assistance, the plan concluded, crisis areas “would be the perfect breeding ground for the coronavirus” and could suffer millions of deaths.

The new appeal comes on the heels of the U.N.’s record-high $18 billion raised for humanitarian crises in 2019. Mr. Lowcock acknowledged the financial strain that the coronavirus appeal would impose on donor nations, but also said it was vital to keep the disease at bay.

Mr. Lowcock’s agency has so far distributed $15 million, and will announce about $60 million more on Wednesday.

The World Health Organization, another U.N. agency, has received about $195 million so far from donor nations and $69 million in pledged funding. The W.H.O. has sent masks, gloves and other personal protective equipment to 68 countries; it has also shipped 1.5 million testing kits to 120 countries.

But the U.N.’s overall response to the pandemic so far has been seen as relatively meager and disjointed. The 15-member U.N. Security Council — including the five world powers that make up its permanent members — has also been criticized for failing to move to stop the spread of the virus.

Rob Berschinski, a former senior official at the State Department, the Pentagon and the White House during the Obama administration, attributed the council’s inaction against the coronavirus largely to the political reluctance by two of its key players: the United States, where President Trump is focused on the domestic response, and China, where the virus originated.

“It’s a massive mistake, and one that council members can rectify, if (and it’s a big ‘if’) they can summon the political will,” Mr. Berschinski wrote in an essay published on Tuesday for the Just Security website, based at New York University School of Law.

It is not clear how much money the United States might commit, given Mr. Trump’s suspicion of the United Nations. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has repeatedly said the United States has provided $100 million in direct assistance to countries across the world, but the State Department has not provided details of where it has sent funding, or how much, despite repeated requests.

Without the U.N. assistance, the 53 nations identified in Wednesday’s response plan would “have no other resources” to treat or protect people from the pandemic, Mr. Lowcock said.

Thomas J. Bollyky, the director of the global health program at the Council on Foreign Relations, called the U.N. plan and funding appeal “very positive measures in settings desperately in need of assistance.” However, he said, the U.N. will need to ensure that aid workers distributing assistance to coronavirus patients do not themselves become sick, highlighting the need for training and teams that can quickly detect infection.

If the coronavirus “takes hold in fragile, conflict-riven countries, it will undermine the safety and efforts of all nations to get this terrible pandemic under better control,” Mr. Bollyky said.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — Congressional leaders and Trump administration officials closed in on a deal on Tuesday on a roughly $2 trillion economic stabilization plan to respond to the coronavirus pandemic, after agreeing to Democratic demands to add oversight requirements for a $500 billion government bailout fund for distressed companies.

Negotiators were hammering out the final details of the plan, which is aimed at delivering critical financial support to businesses forced to shut their doors and relief to American families and hospitals reeling from the rapid spread of the disease and the resulting economic disruption. With lawmakers and White House officials expressing optimism for an agreement, the measure could be enacted within days.

A crucial breakthrough came when Democrats won concessions from the Trump administration to add strict oversight over the $500 billion corporate aid fund, including installing an inspector general and a panel appointed by Congress to monitor it. The vast majority of the fund would go to the Federal Reserve to cover loans.

The measures are similar to those put in place as part of the Troubled Asset Relief Program, the centerpiece of the Wall Street bailout enacted in 2008 to respond to the financial meltdown.

Markets around the world rallied on the news that after several days of often contentious talks that left the fate of the stimulus measure in doubt, it appeared to be coming together. The S&P 500 rose more than 9 percent, its biggest gain since 2008. Stocks in Europe climbed as well, while major markets in Asia posted increases that ranked among their biggest in weeks. Shares of hard-hit industries most likely to receive aid, such as casinos and cruise lines, soared.

At the White House, Larry Kudlow, the top economic adviser, said there had been “great progress” on the measure, which he said was “urgently needed to bolster the economy, provide cash infusions and liquidity and stabilize financial markets to get us through a difficult period.”

“This package will be the single largest Main Street assistance program in the history of the United States,” Mr. Kudlow added, although the vast majority of the money in the measure would go to large corporations.

The emerging compromise was a package whose sheer size and scope would have been unthinkable only a couple of weeks ago. Its cost amounted to several hundreds of billions of dollars more than the entire United States federal budget for a year, and administration officials said they hoped that its effect on a battered economy would be exponentially greater, as much as an additional $4 trillion.

Democrats had balked at a version of the stimulus measure drafted by Republicans that they were concerned would give Mr. Mnuchin too much latitude in deciding which companies could receive the funds, and allow him to delay revealing the recipients until six months after the loans were disbursed. They said it would have created a secretive government slush fund controlled by the president and his top advisers, rather than a closely monitored program accountable to taxpayers.

“We have been pushing hard that any contract that the federal government makes with a company to give it loans, that we know of that contract in a very short period of time, that we can examine it,” Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader, said on the Senate floor, as he said the two sides were closing in on a deal. “We in the Senate, those in the House, the press and the American people will know if these things are on the level.”

Speaker Nancy Pelosi said there was “real optimism that we could get something done in the next few hours” after Democrats won crucial concessions from the Trump administration.

Ms. Pelosi, of California, told Democrats on a private conference call that two remaining issues included a Democratic push to expand food assistance benefits and a disagreement over how much money should be allocated for pensions.

But the parties were whittling down remaining disputes, including how much funding to distribute to hospitals across the country. Both Ms. Pelosi and Mr. Schumer, in a separate call with Senate Democrats, said they had secured $130 billion for hospitals, $55 billion more than originally provided, people familiar with the calls said, as well as $150 billion for state and local governments.

Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader, who spent Monday hurling scathing criticism at Democrats for refusing to agree to allow the package to move forward, opened the Senate floor on Tuesday with a more upbeat message.

“Now at last, I believe, we’re on the five-yard line,” he said, taking swipes at Democrats for dragging out the process. “It’s taken a lot of noise and a lot of rhetoric to get us here.”

Mr. McConnell said he hoped the Senate would “get back on track” and pass a relief package, adding that the “clock has run out” for debating a plan that could help save American jobs and companies on the brink of collapse.

transcript

From The New York Times, I’m Michael Barbaro. This is “The Daily.”



Last week, President Trump sounded newly serious about combating the coronavirus, calling himself a quote, “wartime president.” Maggie Haberman on why days later, and with the situation only worsening, the president is abandoning that message.

It’s Wednesday, March 25.

Hello, guys.

Hi.

Hi.

Maggie, it is Tuesday afternoon. Can you tell us about what just happened on the Fox News Channel?

Over the next two hours, the president, the vice president, and the officials tasked with leading our nation’s response on the virus pandemic will join us to answer your questions all across America.

We just saw Vice President Mike Pence and President Trump sit for two hours at a town hall meeting — virtual town hall meeting — with Fox News from the White House, where they took questions by remote.

I think a lot of us right now are just wondering, what is the potential for a national stay-at-home order? Is this something that America could be seeing in our near future?

Pence answered a bunch of questions first.

Carly, I can tell you that at no point has the White House coronavirus task force discussed what some people call a nationwide lockdown.

Then, President Trump came on for the second hour.

Our people are full of vim and vigor and energy. They don’t want to be locked into a house or an apartment or some space. It’s not for our country. We’re not — we’re not built that way.

And his message was even louder of a message that he’s been delivering for the last day or so, which is that while we have to take the coronavirus seriously —

You know, I don’t want the cure to be worse than the problem itself.

— in his words, the cure can’t be worse than the disease.

— the problem being, obviously, the problem. And you know, you can destroy a country this way by closing it down.

And by that, he means that the hits to the economy are becoming unsustainable. That it can’t go on forever.

You’re going to lose people. You’re going to have suicides by the thousands. You’re going to have all sorts of things happen. You’re going to have instability. You can’t just come in and say, let’s close up the United States of America, the biggest, the most successful country in the world by far.

And then he broke some news.

I’d love to have it open by Easter. OK? I would love to have it open by Easter.

Oh wow, OK.

And that news was that he believes that by April 12, which is Easter, that that could be when the country and its economy are reopened.

It’s such an important day for other reasons, but I’ll make it an important day for this, too. I would love to have the country opened up and just raring to go by Easter.

Maggie, this seems very much at odds with the messaging coming from more local leaders and health officials in the areas of the U.S. that have been most directly hit by this pandemic so far. I’m thinking, for example, of the governor of New York, Andrew Cuomo, who was warning New York residents —

Look, this can go on for several months, OK?

— that they should be preparing for four, six —

— eight months, nine months.

Nine months of life under isolation and shutdown to fight the coronavirus.

Michael, about half an hour or so before Mike Pence started this town hall —

You have 20,000 ventilators in the stockpile. Release the ventilators to New York.

— Andrew Cuomo was pleading with the federal government to send more resources, especially ventilators, because the number of cases that are severe in New York is growing and keeps getting bigger and bigger. And it is outpacing the number of materials that they have for doctors to treat them.

I need the ventilators in 14 days. Only the federal government has that power.

You have health officials in New York, health officials in California, health officials in President Trump’s own government saying we are not just a mere two or three weeks away from things going back to normal. And they’re basing that not just on idle projections, but watching what those curves have looked like in terms of the spread of the virus.

Also, Maggie, help us understand how we got here and why this is the message from the president at this critical moment — when how we respond, what measures we take, and how long we take those measures really matters. And so I wonder where you think that starts. Where do we begin to understand that?

Michael, you need to go back to January 22 when the president was in Davos for the World Economic Forum.

It’s great to see you. Thank you for joining us again in Davos. We’ve done this before.

That’s right.

And he did an interview with CNBC. And at that point, the virus was already in the U.S.

The C.D.C. has identified a case of coronavirus in Washington state.

And he was asked by the interviewer if he was concerned that this could become a pandemic.

Have you been briefed by the C.D.C.?

I have.

Are there worries about a pandemic at this point?

No, we’re not at all.

And the president’s response was, no, not at all.

It’s one person coming in from China, and we have it under control. It’s going to be just fine.

OK.

He didn’t want to talk about it publicly at the time.

And why do you think that was?

Well, according to a number of people who were in contact with him, it was because he didn’t want to rattle the financial markets. That he was hoping that it was going to stay under control, and the stock markets are his political weathervane, and he thinks they need to stay up in order for him to win re-election. And he didn’t want to do anything to disturb that. And he didn’t want to create a panic.

OK. So what happened next?

So after that, a couple of days later, as there were more cases and it was clear that it was spreading out of China — where it originated — the president took this move that he was widely criticized for by Democrats and even some Republicans at the time. Which was he halted a number of flights from China into the U.S.

Disney’s closed.

Yeah.

Movie theaters are closed. Hospitals being built. I think we’re now up to our eighth case in the United States. How concerned are you?

Well, we pretty much shut it down coming in from China.

The idea was to halt the spread of the disease, keep transmissions to a minimum. He was accused of xenophobia. He was accused of making a racist move. At the end of the day, it was probably effective, because it did actually take a pretty aggressive measure against the spread of the virus. The problem is, it was one of the last things that he did for several weeks.

Hmm. So the right decision in retrospect, but not accompanied by similar actions that might have contained transmission.

That’s exactly right. In the same way that George W. Bush was criticized for his “Mission Accomplished” banner about Iraq, the president treated that moment as if it was his mission accomplished moment. He did not do anything after that in terms of alerting the public, or telling people to be safe, or telling people to take precautions. And it basically squandered several weeks within the U.S.

Right. Looking back at the timeline, we can now see that on the same day that the president stopped those flights from China, the coronavirus was already being reported by the W.H.O. in Japan and South Korea, and those countries are still sending their citizens to the United States on flights that have not been stopped. So the horse is out of the barn.

Exactly. It was not anything close to a “whole-of-government approach.” And at that point, there was a task force that was formed, and it was being led by the health and human services secretary, Alex Azar. But it was outside of the White House, and it was rife with all kinds of turf battles. And the president, meanwhile, was still trying not to talk about it.

And succeeding in that, for the most part.

And succeeding in that, for the most part. It was not something that came up in interviews that he did, which were mostly with friendly interviewers who weren’t going to ask him things that he didn’t want to talk about. And look, it’s not as if it wasn’t getting news coverage. The New York Times had it on the front page almost every day from the end of January. It was very clear that this was a global crisis, but it was not being treated as an American crisis. And I think a lot of that is because the president just was not talking about it.

And do we know what information the president is receiving during this time? Is he getting a bunch of briefings — one would think he would be — that are conveying the seriousness of the approaching situation?

There’s conflicting information, Michael, about exactly how specific and how alarmed the briefing materials the president was receiving were at this time. We understand that a lot of folks in the National Security Council were taking it very seriously, and that information had been passed to him. We understand that Alex Azar, the health and human services secretary, took it very seriously, but it’s not clear that he was sharing all of that with the president or that he was being allowed to tell it to the president. There were some people in the White House who viewed Alex Azar in particular as quote-unquote “alarmist” — thought that he was overstating the threat. And when the president doesn’t want to take something particularly seriously, he’ll often poll test advisers until he finds the one who agrees with him that he shouldn’t take it seriously. And I have every reason to believe that he was looking for people to affirm his sense that this didn’t really need to be addressed. And one of the places that he would go to hear his own thoughts affirmed or for solace was Fox News.

If you’ve ever had a question whether the mainstream media distorts, whips up, throw things out of focus or has an agenda, especially when it comes to the Trump administration, look no further than coronavirus.

They were very much echoing what he believed and wanted to believe, which was that the criticisms about inactivity that he wasn’t doing enough was all part of an effort to harm him.

This is yet another attempt to impeach the president. And sadly, it seems they care very little for any of the destruction they are leaving in their wake — losses in the stock market. All this, unfortunately, just part of the political casualties for them.



At this point, the president is in India being fitted by Prime Minister Modi, and public health officials start basically taking matters into their own hands. They start giving public warnings. One top health expert gave a press briefing where she said that —

Now, it’s not so much a question of if this will happen anymore, but rather more a question of exactly when this will happen.

It was no longer a question of if the virus would spread in the United States, but when.

And how many people in this country will become infected, and how many of those will develop severe or more complicated disease.

And that hospitals and businesses and schools should start making preparations accordingly.

Right.

This was as the president was now on his way back from India, and the stock market reacted terribly to these warnings. And the president was furious. He called the health and human services secretary, saying that the remarks had rattled people. He called one of his top economic advisers, Larry Kudlow, wondering what could be done to stop the slide. But at this point, as angry as the president was, it was clear to him and to his advisers that this was no longer something he could ignore.



We’ll be right back.

So Maggie, what happens once the president recognizes that this is something that has to be addressed?

The president put Vice President Mike Pence in charge of the task force.

Good afternoon. We just completed today’s lengthy meeting of the White House coronavirus task force.

And that was a big moment, because this task force that had been kind of diffuse and fighting with itself was for the first time being run from the White House. And it was meant to signal that the president was taking this seriously. So Mike Pence had control of this thing for basically two weeks. And during that time —

We’re continuing to lean into this effort in full partnership with state and local health authorities around the country —

— he was trying to communicate that they were working on a plan —

— to ensure that we do everything to prevent the spread of the disease.

To address the spread, that they were working on guidelines, that they were aware of problems with testing for this virus that have plagued this administration for weeks.

To mitigate its expansion and to provide necessary treatment to Americans that have been impacted.

And after two weeks, Vice President Mike Pence was getting a lot of praise for his demeanor in these briefings.

If I may, we’ll be back here every day. Get used to seeing us. We’re going to bring the experts in. We’re going to make sure and give you the best and most high quality, real time information from the best people in the world. So thank you all for being here.

Thank you. You’re welcome back any time.

And that became a point of concern for some of President Trump’s own advisers, who didn’t want to see Mike Pence get all of the attention.

Huh. So the people around the president didn’t want the vice resident, rather than the president, to be the one seen as quarterbacking this major national crisis?

That’s right. There was concern among the president’s top advisers that it would look as if Vice President Pence was basically doing the job the president should be doing — calming a nation, giving out accurate information, sounding as if he’s in charge. And that led to this idea that the president should give an Oval Office address. So on March 11, the same day the W.H.O. declared the coronavirus a global pandemic, President Trump sat in the Oval Office behind the Resolute Desk at 9 p.m., and the klieg lights came on and the teleprompter started rolling. And he gave an address to the nation.

My fellow Americans, tonight I want to speak with you about our nation’s unprecedented response to the coronavirus outbreak that started in China and is now spreading throughout the world.

For the first time, he acknowledged that this could impact older people.

The highest risk is for elderly population with underlying health conditions. The elderly population must be very, very careful.

He talked about a ban on most travel from Europe.

To keep new cases from entering our shores, we will be suspending all travel from Europe to the United States for the next 30 days. The new rules will go into effect Friday at midnight.

But the address, which was brief, as Oval Office addresses usually are, was seen as a disaster.

Why?

The President looked uncomfortable. He stumbled over the teleprompter, which he never does well with.

I am confident that by counting and continuing to take these tough measures, we will —

And it was riddled with errors, including about the travel ban.

— and these prohibitions will not only apply to the tremendous amount of trade in cargo, but various other things as we get approval.

He suggested that it would apply to cargo and trade. It didn’t, and those mistakes sent the stock markets plummeting.

Right. And my assumption was that the President hoped the speech would do the exact opposite, which is it would give confidence to the stock market and send it back up.

That’s right. The markets continued to tank over the next couple of days. And aides started realizing that there had to be a major course correction or the presidency could be threatened. And the President realized this too. So on March 17 —

I would like to begin by announcing some important developments in our war against the Chinese virus.

— we saw a pretty different tone from President Trump as he talked about this virus.

We’ll be invoking the Defense Production Act just in case we need it. Last week, I signed an emergency declaration under the Stafford Act.

He described it soberly. He suddenly seemed willing to answer questions without being combative.

Do you consider America to be on a wartime footing in terms of fighting this virus?

I do. I actually do. I’m looking at it that way, because you know —

He described himself as a wartime president. He seemed to be taking this seriously in all of the ways that a nation usually looks for a leader to take such a crisis seriously.

It’s a very tough situation, here. You have to do things. You have to close parts of an economy that six weeks ago were the best they’ve ever been. We had the best economy we’ve ever had. And then one day you have to close it down in order to defeat this enemy. But we’re doing it, and we’re doing it well. And I’d say the American people have been incredible.

This was dramatically different from what we had heard just a few days earlier.

Well, so, Maggie, how then do we get to today, where one week later, the situation with this pandemic has only gotten dramatically worse? The virus is exploding in places like New York. The number of infections and deaths are rising across the country. And yet, the president’s message has now kind of reverted back to where it was weeks and weeks ago. His language has changed. His overall comportment and the words he’s using — they’ve all kind of returned to a period where he was not taking this as seriously.

There have been people in the President’s circle who, this entire time, even as the President changed his tone, still thought that some of the moves that the government was making were too aggressive. And those aides started, late last week, talking about the fact that they might want to revisit some of these guidelines and ease up on some of them for targeted groups after this initial 15-day period had ended, which is going to be March 30th. The president started getting the message in earnest on Sunday night that this is something that he needed to worry about. That there might not be an economy to return to once the country was fully back to normal. And so he tweeted on Sunday night that the cure couldn’t be worse than the disease. And that was the beginning of a massive shift of the federal government, which had moved toward aggressive measures to mitigate this virus and its spread, to suddenly suggesting that they could see the end nearing.



We can’t lose a Boeing. And we can’t lose some of these companies. And companies — frankly, Bill — that were solid as, like, AAA companies. Because of what’s happened over the last couple of weeks, they go from AAA to being, like, they could use a hand.

Tough time.

We can’t — you’re right. We can’t lose those companies. If we lose those companies, were talking about hundreds of thousands of jobs, millions of jobs. The faster we go back, the better it’s going to be. We have a pent-up energy that’s going to be unbelievable.

Is there a meaningful contingency of conservative leaders, thinkers, and politicians, economists even, people in business who feel this way, who feel like there’s been an overreaction to this virus in the form of shutting down the American economy?

There are. Some of them are people who have been the president’s advisers on and off for a while, like Stephen Moore of FreedomWorks, who’s an economist and who advised the president at various points. He wrote an op-ed for The Wall Street Journal with Art Laffer, who the president gave the Medal of Freedom to not that long ago. And in that op-ed, they said, essentially, that the government can’t sustain this. That the economy can’t sustain this. And that there needs to be less draconian moves made to keep people safe but still allow the country to run.

Mm-hmm.

There is no public health expert in the government telling the president that these moves are too severe. There is no public health expert in the government telling the president that the curve is about to let up on the spread of the virus. Everything the president has done about this virus has been a reaction to something, and right now he is reacting to pressure to reopen portions of the economy, as the job losses are facing potential millions by April.

You know, I don’t know whether the President would frame it this way, but I wonder if he’s forcing all of us to reckon with what is the ultimate moral dilemma of this pandemic, which is what economic and social cost we’re willing to pay to save some uncertain number of lives. And he seems to be saying, in effect, I’m willing to take the risk that a certain number of Americans will get sick and will die for the greater economic good and health of the United States.

I mean, think of it. We average 36,000 people — death, death. I’m not talking about cases, I’m talking about death. 36,000 deaths a year. People die, 36 — from the flu. But we’ve never closed down the country for the flu. So you say to yourself, what is this all about? Now —

How did you —

It’s never been done.

How did you process that?

Not good. I wasn’t happy about it.

Michael, I think that’s very much what he’s saying. And in fairness to him, Governor Cuomo has openly voiced the same moral dilemma that he is wrestling with. It’s just that Governor Cuomo came down on the other side of it, which was that there is no cost that can be put on human life.

Yeah, my mother is not expendable. And your mother is not expendable. And our brothers and sisters they’re not expendable. And we’re not going to accept a premise that human life is disposable. And we’re not going to put a dollar figure on human life. The first order of business is save lives, period. Whatever it costs.

New York has been, as we know, much harder hit than most of the rest of the country. Most of the rest of the country has not had to go through what New York is going through right now with surges in hospital stays and a number of sick people. The president says most of the country agrees with him, and maybe that’s why.

 But the president is taking a really large gamble, and going with his gut, that the greater good will be served for the rest of the country by trying to preserve the economic health of the country more quickly than his health experts would like him to.

Maggie, thank you very much.

Michael, thank you.

On Tuesday night, Dr. Anthony Fauci, an infectious disease specialist and an influential member of the president’s coronavirus task force, was asked about the president’s plan to reopen the U.S. economy by Easter.

Where are you now with this timeline of 19 days from now?

So that’s really very flexible. We just had a conversation with the president in the Oval Office talking about, you know, you can look at a date, but you’ve got to be very flexible. On a literally day-by-day and week-by-week basis, you need to evaluate the feasibility of what you’re trying to do.

With the president standing beside him, Fauci said it would be foolhardy to ease restrictions if major parts of the country were still in the throes of the pandemic.

Obviously, no one is going to want to tone down things when you see what’s going on in a place like New York City. I mean, that’s just, you know, good public health practice and common sense.



We’ll be right back.

Here’s what else you need to know today.

[SPEAKING HINDI]

Nationwide lockdowns over the virus continued on Tuesday with India becoming the latest and largest country to require citizens to remain indoors, in India’s case, for the next 21 days.

[SPEAKING HINDI]

In a televised speech, Prime Minister Narendra Modi told Indians, quote, “If you can’t handle these 21 days, this country will go back 21 years.” And in the United States, Senate leaders said they were nearing a deal on a historic $2 trillion stimulus bill after days of objections from Democrats over who would monitor billions of dollars in loans to American businesses.

We’ve been fighting very hard that any bailout fund — money to industries that have trouble — have real oversight and transparency. That’s vitally important.

On Tuesday, Democrats said they had persuaded Republicans and the Trump administration to allow an independent inspector and a congressional oversight board to scrutinize the loans, and were almost ready to support the bill.

I hope, I pray, that we can come together very quickly and pass in large numbers a bipartisan bill that will help the American people who so badly, badly, badly need our help.



That’s it for “The Daily.” I’m Michael Barbaro. See you tomorrow.

The measure would also provide $1,200 direct payments to taxpayers, substantially increase jobless benefits and send money to states struggling to weather a huge public health and economic disaster. Mr. Schumer said Republicans had agreed to extend unemployment insurance for an additional month at Democrats’ insistence, for a total of four months. The two sides had previously agreed to expand the program considerably, to include self-employed and part-time workers who traditionally have not been eligible, and to cover 100 percent of wages to the average worker.

Under the newly negotiated terms, those already on unemployment before the crisis would also see their benefits extended 13 weeks beyond when they are currently set to run out, according to a Democratic aide familiar with the talks.

The growing confidence on Capitol Hill was a jarring contrast with the rancor that has reigned in the Senate for days, as Democrats twice blocked efforts to advance the plan until they could secure stronger protections for workers and restrictions for bailed-out businesses. Republicans complained that they were turning their backs on substantial compromises and holding up desperately needed aid.

But even as partisan bickering consumed the normally staid Senate on Monday, Mr. Schumer and Steven Mnuchin, the Treasury secretary, huddled repeatedly to hammer out their disagreements. And Mr. McConnell and Ms. Pelosi were kept closely informed of the talks.

Any agreement struck and approved in the Senate would still have to secure support from the Democratic majority in the House, which introduced its own $2.5 trillion legislative package on Monday. That package is full of progressive policy agenda items like emissions limits for bailed-out airlines, pay equity and workplace diversity requirements for companies that received aid as well as a new requirement for at least 15 consecutive days of early voting in federal elections.

The House is in recess, with some of its members sick or in quarantine and concerned about flying back to Washington. Democratic leaders were considering approving the mammoth proposal by unanimous consent, a tactic reserved mostly for minor, uncontroversial measures. They appeared to have the agreement of top Republicans, who worked on Tuesday to anticipate whether any of their conference members would object.

Some lawmakers have expressed reservations about approving legislation of such magnitude without a recorded vote, particularly before being able to read the details of the agreement themselves.

On the two-hour call with House Democrats, Representative Pramila Jayapal, Democrat of Washington State, said rank-and-file lawmakers needed more information if they were going to be expected to provide consent, both about the legislation and the largest points of contention, according to two officials familiar with the call, but unauthorized to discuss it publicly. Representative Tom Malinowski, Democrat of New Jersey, said he was uncomfortable with the precedent that would be set if lawmakers continued to approve trillions of dollars in federal spending without recorded votes.

Representative Steny H. Hoyer of Maryland, the No. 2 House Democrat, said during the discussion that it was possible that Congress would consider at least two more measures to respond to the pandemic after clearing the stimulus measure, which would give lawmakers additional chances to win provisions that were not included.

The extraordinary circumstances may be enough to persuade lawmakers to put aside their reservations and agree to the package quickly. Representative Ben McAdams, Democrat of Utah and one of three lawmakers who have tested positive for Covid-19, issued a statement on Tuesday from his hospital bed asking his colleagues to approve it.

Sheryl Gay Stolberg contributed reporting.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — In another workplace, in another town, the news that a colleague who, days and even hours before testing positive for the novel coronavirus, had been dining and meeting and working out alongside his co-workers might have spurred some drastic measures.

Not so in Congress.

Senator Rand Paul’s announcement on Sunday that he had tested positive for the virus did little to alter the course of business on Monday in the Senate, where lawmakers continued to meet, spar and vote as leaders and top administration officials worked frantically to negotiate the largest economic stimulus measure in modern history.

As states, cities and employers around the country direct Americans to stay at home and shelter in place to slow the spread of the coronavirus pandemic, the Senate — nearly half of whose members are 65 and older — continues to defy the recommendations of public health experts. Mr. Paul’s diagnosis, which prompted two other Republican senators to quarantine themselves, only underscored the danger of the situation.

“It is naïve for us to believe that this is the end of the challenge to our membership,” said Senator Richard J. Durbin of Illinois, the second-ranking Democrat, imploring his colleagues to shutter the Senate and institute remote voting, an idea that has been resisted by congressional leaders in both parties. “We should not be physically present on this floor at this moment — we know better.”

Below the surface, Mr. Paul’s diagnosis prompted fear and anger inside the Capitol. Aides in the Kentucky Republican’s Washington office were anxious and outraged by the senator’s decision to continue working after learning he had potentially been exposed, without telling staff members who could have become infected, according to a person familiar with the situation who insisted on anonymity to describe internal discussions.

Two Republican senators who had dined with Mr. Paul left the Capitol and quarantined themselves as a precaution. And those left in the building on Monday were clearly uneasy as their impassioned pleas for action became freighted with a certain grim subtext.

“We don’t have another day! We don’t have another hour,” said an outraged Senator Susan Collins, Republican of Maine, imploring Democrats to allow a relief package that was still under negotiation to move forward quickly. “We don’t have another minute to delay acting.”

Senator Amy Klobuchar, Democrat of Minnesota, announced that her husband, John Bessler, had tested positive for the virus and was hospitalized with pneumonia in Virginia, receiving oxygen to help him breathe. Ms. Klobuchar said she would not enter quarantine or get tested because she had not been in the same place with her husband for two weeks and was outside the 14-day threshold for getting sick.

Mr. Paul, 57 and a former practicing eye doctor, was informed two weekends ago that he had attended a fund-raiser in Kentucky with two individuals who later tested positive for the disease, a warning that sent a handful of other prominent elected officials into self-quarantine out of caution. Mr. Paul, whose office said he has shown no symptoms, did not, but he apparently did obtain a test, and his positive result on Sunday made him the first senator to announce that he had contracted the virus.

The news that Mr. Paul had maintained his normal schedule for days after getting tested — dining with his colleagues at conference lunches, voting on the Senate floor and taking a swim in the senators-only pool just hours before he received his results — ricocheted through the Capitol, rattling and angering the network of lawmakers and aides who have worked late hours for days in close quarters, and plan to continue doing so for the foreseeable future.

“He is a physician himself; he’s able to do his own risk assessment,” Senator Kevin Cramer, Republican of North Dakota, told reporters. “Evidently, he miscalculated.”

Mr. Paul came under withering criticism from some colleagues — although most expressed their outrage only privately — and on Monday, he sought to defend himself. His account, which said that he got tested last Monday after arriving in Washington from Kentucky, only underscored the likelihood that he had exposed other senators to the illness.

“The nature of Covid-19 put me — and us all — in a Catch-22 situation,” Mr. Paul said. “I didn’t fit the criteria for testing or quarantine. I had no symptoms and no specific encounter with a Covid-19 positive person.”

He continued: “For those who want to criticize me for lack of quarantine, realize that if the rules on testing had been followed to a tee, I would never have been tested and would still be walking around the halls of the Capitol. The current guidelines would not have called for me to get tested nor quarantined. It was my extra precaution, out of concern for my damaged lung, that led me to get tested.”

Mr. Paul continues to be “asymptomatic,” his statement said.

The recriminations have spread to Mr. Paul’s own Washington office.

His aides had never been told Mr. Paul might have been exposed to the virus or had been tested for it, according to a person familiar with the situation, and some began to fear that they could have contracted it and spread it to their friends and family before the office began working remotely, days after Mr. Paul attended the fund-raiser. Mr. Paul attended the fund-raiser on a Saturday and arrived in Washington the next Monday evening. His office closed to work remotely three days later.

Senior officials in Mr. Paul’s Washington office told their staffs that none of them were at risk, the person said. But the aides remained livid that they were informed of Mr. Paul’s exposure only minutes before their office publicly announced his positive test results.

Despite the panic prompted by Mr. Paul’s announcement, on Monday, debate on the Senate floor proceeded mostly as usual — albeit in more fiery terms — with lawmakers filing into the chamber to vote and sitting in their desks next to one another. But the specter of the coronavirus weighed heavily over the proceedings.

As Mr. Durbin concluded a speech with his call for remote voting, Senator Jim Risch, Republican of Idaho, approached him. Both men kept their arms crossed, and Mr. Durbin slowly backed away step by step as they spoke, creating more and more distance between them.

Mr. Paul’s announcement appeared to have won over some converts for the idea of remote voting. Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, who had previously shrugged off the suggestion, took to Twitter to offer his support for the idea.

“We should make this change before the Senate leaves town,” Mr. Graham wrote.

There is no indication that House or Senate leaders are moving toward doing so. A report released Monday night by Representative Jim McGovern, Democrat of Massachusetts and the chairman of the House Rules Committee, underscored the hurdles — both technical and legal — such a move would create, and instead recommended using existing practices, like adopting legislation by unanimous consent.

For now, senators are maintaining their routine — albeit from a substantial distance, and under considerably more stress.

“I’d like to suggest to my friends on both sides of the aisle that we first assume the appropriate distance,” Mr. Durbin said on Monday as tempers flared on the Senate floor, “and then secondly, take a deep breath.”

Nicholas Fandos and Emily Cochrane contributed reporting.

<|endoftext|>

About 50 guests gathered on March 5 at a home in the stately suburb of Westport, Conn., to toast the hostess on her 40th birthday and greet old friends, including one visiting from South Africa. They shared reminiscences, a lavish buffet and, unknown to anyone, the coronavirus.

Then they scattered.

The Westport soirée — Party Zero in southwestern Connecticut and beyond — is a story of how, in the Gilded Age of money, social connectedness and air travel, a pandemic has spread at lightning speed. The partygoers — more than half of whom are now infected — left that evening for Johannesburg, New York City and other parts of Connecticut and the United States, all seeding infections on the way.

Westport, a town of 28,000 on the Long Island Sound, did not have a single known case of the coronavirus on the day of the party. It had 85 on Monday, up more than 40-fold in 11 days.

At a news conference on Monday afternoon, Gov. Ned Lamont of Connecticut said that 415 people in the state were infected, up from 327 on Sunday night. Ten people have died. Westport, with less than 1 percent of the state’s population, now makes up more than one-fifth of its Covid-19 infections, with 85 cases. Fairfield County, where Westport is, has 270 cases, 65 percent of the state’s total.

Governor Lamont pleaded with federal officials for hospital capacity and protective gear. “I urge them: Don’t think in terms of New York, think in terms of the hot spots,” he said. “And that’s New York City, Westchester County — and Fairfield County.”

Science cannot definitively link those escalating numbers to New York, which now accounts for about half of the coronavirus infections in the United States. But the Westport soirée “may be an example of the kind of thing we call a super-spreading event,” said William Hanage, an associate professor of epidemiology at Harvard, especially since some of the partygoers later attended large social events in the New York metropolitan area.

“Some of the early cases in Northern Italy were associated with small towns, and people thought, ‘Oh, it’s just in the small towns.’ But then you suddenly find cases emerging from Milan Fashion Week and spreading internationally,” Dr. Hanage said. “Everywhere you think the virus is, it’s ahead of you."

The visitor from Johannesburg — a 43-year-old businessman, according to a report from South Africa — fell ill on his flight home, spreading the virus not only in the country but possibly to fellow passengers. The party guests attended other gatherings. They went to work at jobs throughout the New York metropolitan area. Their children went to school and day care, soccer games and after-school sports.

On the morning of March 8, three days after the party, Julie Endich, one of the guests, woke up in Westport with a fever that spiked to 104 degrees and “pain, tightness and heaviness like someone was standing on my chest,” she later wrote on Facebook. She knew her symptoms suggested Covid-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus, but it would be four days before she could get test results confirming that she had it.

At noon that day, town and county health officials convened a coronavirus forum at the Westport Library. About 60 people attended, and many others watched on Facebook. When asked whether people, especially Westport’s many older residents, should follow federal government guidance and avoid large gatherings, officials were sanguine.

“It is not out in our community that we’re aware of yet,” said Mark A.R. Cooper, the director of the Westport Weston Health District. “Give it some thought, but again, your risk is low.”

A moderator next passed the microphone to an older man.

“How many test kits do we have in Westport now?” he asked.

“Zero,” Mr. Cooper replied. “None. They’re not available.”

Three days later, on March 11, Mr. Cooper got a phone call: A South African businessman who had stopped in Westport for a party had fallen ill on the plane home to Johannesburg.

“I thought it was good old man flu,” the businessman told The Sunday Times in South Africa, speaking anonymously in a March 15 article. Unlike in the United States, where tests remain in short supply and results come slowly, the man was tested and received word in a day. He was positive.

Mr. Cooper and his staff of nine dusted off their pandemic response plan and began calling party guests, identified by the Westport hosts. A number of the guests had children. Several hours later, Westport closed its schools and most public buildings. Jim Marpe, the Westport first selectman — the equivalent of a mayor — convened a hasty news conference on the steps of the Westport Town Hall.

“We’ll assess the health of those individuals and try to give them some helpful advice in terms of protecting themselves and family and helping prevent further spread,” Mr. Cooper told the crowd.

But, he warned, “The reality is, once it starts to spread in a community, it’s beyond trying to stop it.”

The health district worked with a private company to conduct drive-through testing for party guests only on March 12. About 38 guests showed up, and more than half their tests came back positive. Ms. Endich, after days of rejected attempts, was tested at Stamford Hospital and received her positive result on March 12.

“What we were trying to do was put our arms around it quickly and snuff it out,” Mr. Cooper said. “Never did we dream that in a week’s time we were going to be in the middle of an epidemic.”

The number of sick people in Fairfield County then soared. On March 16, Governor Lamont closed restaurants and public buildings statewide. Even in a well-connected, affluent town like Westport, contact tracing quickly overwhelmed health officials. Beyond the 50 attendees, “there were another 120 on our dance list,” some of whom probably were not at the party, Mr. Cooper said. One of the party guests later acknowledged attending an event with 420 other people, he said. The officials gave up.

“They think at least 100 times as many people are infected as what the tests are showing,” Arpad Krizsan, who owns a financial advisory firm in Westport and lives in the community, said on Saturday. “And everybody goes to the same four shops.”

Worry, rumors and recriminations engulfed the town. Political leaders fielded hundreds of emails and phone calls from residents terrified that their children or vulnerable family members had been exposed. Who threw the party, and who attended? They wanted to know. Rumors flew that some residents were telling health officials they had attended the party so they could obtain a scarce test.

Officials refused to disclose the names of the hosts or any guests, citing federal and state privacy rules. Mr. Marpe posted a videotaped statement to the town website on March 20. “The fact of the matter is that this could have been any one of us, and rumor-mongering and vilification of individuals is not who we are as a civil community,” he said.

As the disease spread, many residents kept mum, worried about being ostracized by their neighbors and that their children would be kicked off coveted sports teams or miss school events.

One local woman compared going public with a Covid-19 diagnosis to “having an S.T.D.”

“I don’t think that’s a crazy comparison,” said Will Haskell, the state senator who represents Westport. He has been fielding frantic phone calls from constituents.

Most residents were exercising recommended vigilance, Mr. Haskell said, but one call that stuck out to him was from a woman awaiting test results whose entire family had been exposed to the virus. “She wanted to know whether or not to tell her friends and social network,” he said, because she was worried about “social stigma.”

Mr. Haskell, who has been delivering his grandparents’ medication to their Westport doorstep and leaving it outside, was incredulous. “This is life or death,” he said in an interview. “Westport really is a cautionary tale of what we’re soon to see.”

The party hosts remain unknown to most, though speculation is rife. Two of the guests, Ms. Endich and Cheryl Chutter, an attendee who lives in Stamford, have identified themselves.

Though she said she was “relentless” in demanding a test, Ms. Chutter did not learn of her diagnosis until March 17. She notified her son’s private school, and “they sent him home in an Uber and closed the school three hours later,” she said. His youth soccer league scrapped the rest of the season for 1,500 players after she informed team leaders that she had stood with other parents cheering on the sidelines before she got sick.

Ms. Chutter and Ms. Endich both emphasized the kindness of their neighbors, who spontaneously delivered food, water and encouragement. Ms. Chutter said health officials called daily to check on her. She is also aware of blaming and efforts to out the party attendees.

“It’s no use pointing fingers,” she said in an interview. “It’s not like you’re going to lock that one person up when there are millions of people in the world who have it. We’re so past that.”

The first partygoer to learn that he was ill with the virus passed word from Johannesburg to Westport that he had fully recovered and even planned to go for a jog.

“I don’t believe I’m the problem anymore,” he told The Sunday Times. “It seems that the real problem is now the people who are too scared to say anything. The problem is the ignorance of the public.”

Sheila Kaplan contributed reporting from Washington. Kitty Bennett contributed research.

<|endoftext|>

SAN FRANCISCO — Wildfires, earthquakes, mudslides. California knows disaster.

Yet if dire predictions hold, the state’s experience and vast resources do not seem adequate to hold back the tsunami of coronavirus cases that experts fear are on the way.

Gov. Gavin Newsom on Monday said that California would be short about 17,000 hospital beds, raising his previous estimate of a 10,000-bed shortfall. The state was also short 1 billion protective gloves and hundreds of millions of masks, he said.

And the pace of testing remains stubbornly slow in California. New York State, with half the population, has conducted twice as many tests for the virus as the Golden State.

As of Monday, New York has tested 78,289 people, including 33,000 in New York City. Statewide, California had conducted 26,400 tests by Sunday, the most recent data available.

California, a state that its governor often describes as a nation unto itself, is meeting the threat of the coronavirus with strings of superlatives. The state with the biggest economy and largest population is harnessing the power and resources of the world’s most successful technology companies. Mr. Newsom said the state was also chartering flights to China to procure protective equipment and expressed concern for smaller states that might not have the same purchasing power.

Warning that America could be just days behind Italy, where the virus has claimed thousands of lives, officials in California have rushed to reopen hospitals that had been shuttered, buy motels to house the state’s more than 150,000 homeless people, and retrofit college dormitories to serve as hospital wards.

But whether all of this will be enough is the question on the minds of everyone while hunkering down at home.

Mr. Newsom has called up the National Guard to work at food banks, and President Trump ordered a Navy hospital ship, with a thousand beds, to sail to the Port of Los Angeles within a week.

“It will become the largest hospital in Los Angeles when it docks,” Mayor Eric Garcetti of Los Angeles said on Sunday night.

In San Francisco, hospitals have checked out patients without critical needs and are looking for spare capacity wherever they can find it. One hospital, St. Francis Memorial, brought back into service four dozen vacant beds in a furloughed surgery unit. A bankrupt hospital in Daly City, south of San Francisco, was rescued from imminent closure with an infusion of state funds.

The city has also been laying out plans to turn convention centers into temporary shelters, and lease hotel rooms for health care workers and vulnerable people who cannot self-quarantine. Measures to combat the virus were being taken at the state, county and local levels, sometimes resulting in a confusing patchwork of directives, and the governor is also leaning heavily on the private sector.

Mr. Newsom has conferred with Elon Musk, the head of the electric carmaker Tesla, and Tim Cook, the head of Apple. The two executives, along with the Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg, have announced separately that their companies would give a total of 2 million protective masks to the state. Mr. Musk vowed to produce 1,000 ventilators, according to Mr. Newsom.

Within a few minutes at a news conference over the weekend, the governor spoke of the ambivalence of the moment — a feeling of an abundance of resources and talent and yet the scarcities of crucial supplies as the virus spreads.

“I’ve had just in the last 48 hours the opportunity to speak to more scientists, more researchers, more engineers, more Nobel laureates, more C.E.O.s of companies large and small than I have quite literally in years,” Mr. Newsom said.

Even as Mr. Newsom announced the nation’s first statewide stay-at-home orders last week — meant to buy time for the state to prepare for a flood of patients — it became clear that too many people were ignoring the directive.

Over the weekend, people congregated at parks and playgrounds. There were still tours being conducted in Hollywood and pickup basketball games at Venice Beach.

Mayor Garcetti said that the sudden disruptions to normal life could be seen “in the clear skies and the empty freeways” but that “it still isn’t enough.” On Sunday he ordered golf courses and playgrounds closed. Beach communities shut down parking lots and boardwalks. Los Angeles County said it was closing hiking trails. And while at first Mr. Garcetti had said the city would rely on social pressure to enforce the measures, on Sunday he warned that the city was prepared to issue misdemeanor fines to those who disobey.

In San Jose, the police chief railed at a billiard club that had remained open and at people congregating outside. He said his officers were moving toward stricter enforcement.

Across California, a state with many large biotechnology companies, the promise of widespread access to testing for the virus has not materialized. And doctors said they were alarmed about shortages of protective equipment.

Officials in Los Angeles County announced on Monday that the county had procured 20,000 extra tests but said they were prioritizing them for health care workers and the very sick.

The city of Los Angeles, which does not have a health department, is chipping in to help the county by using its own resources to test workers who are symptomatic, including emergency medical workers on the Police and Fire Departments, health care workers, and those trying to get homeless people into shelters and take their temperatures. Over the weekend, a city-run drive-through test center was set up near Dodger Stadium.

In Marin County, north of the Golden Gate Bridge, one crisis dovetailed with another. The county’s three hospitals are less concerned about mask shortages, said Laine Hendricks, a spokeswoman, because Facebook donated 40,000 N-95 masks and 62,000 surgical masks it had bought during last year’s wildfires, when people were worried about smoke inhalation. “We are triaging requests from the hospitals for supplies,” Ms. Hendricks said. “The Facebook donation was helpful but in the long haul we will need more masks and we currently need face shields and gowns.”

Confused by the terms about coronavirus testing? Let us help:

Health authorities issued guidance to hospitals that effectively restrict testing, reflecting a lack of both testing kits and crucial medical supplies like masks and gowns to protect health care workers.

The shift suggested that the state may never get a handle on exactly how many people are infected. Those who have only mild symptoms or believe they were in contact with an infected person but are not themselves sick are being told they do not qualify for testing.

Dr. Scott Morrow, the chief health officer for San Mateo County in Silicon Valley, which has among the highest concentrations of cases in the state, said on Monday that it would be “quite helpful” to have broad-scale testing but that many constraints dictated that tests be given only to sicker patients.

The United States was late to identify the severity of the crisis, and so officials say it is too late to pursue the strategy of South Korea, which instituted widespread testing to contain the pandemic. Instead, in California and other states, the focus is on identifying the sickest people and trying to save their lives.

In new guidance released to California hospitals on Friday from the state’s Department of Public Health, hospitals were told “broad-scale testing is not available.” Hospitals, the letter said, should focus on testing only the most severe cases: patients who are already hospitalized and showing symptoms of Covid-19; residents and staff members of long-term care facilities who have symptoms; and health care workers who have been in contact with patients and have come down sick.

“Persons with mild respiratory symptoms who do not otherwise need medical care and who are not in one of the above groups should not be routinely tested for Covid-19,” according to the letter. The Los Angeles County Department of Public Health issued a similar directive.

In neighboring Ventura County, with a population of more than 850,000, officials are worried that they do not have enough swabs to conduct even this rationed testing for very long.

County drive-through clinics are down to about 100 swabs each, Dr. Todd Flosi, chief medical officer of Ventura County Medical Center and Santa Paula Hospital, said on Monday, and the hospitals need to conserve the limited supply they have.

“If we run out of swabs for the hospital, it will clog our other processes up,” Dr. Flosi said, “because if someone is sick enough to be admitted but a test shows that they don’t have Covid-19, you can remove them from strict isolation guidelines faster, and that frees up space and protective gear.”

Ventura County Medical Center is in relatively good shape in terms of space to accommodate the expected influx of patients because it recently built a hospital building to meet strict state seismic building requirements meant to ensure that hospitals can withstand earthquakes. The old building can quickly be brought back to accommodate overflow, Dr. Flosi said, though administrators first need to figure out how to furnish it with actual beds. Cots and repurposed elective-surgery gurneys are among the options under consideration.

But the shortage of N-95 and surgical masks and other protective gear to treat the number of patients in need of hospitalization is so dire that Ventura hospital officials are looking to the community to supply handmade masks and equipment.

One nurse’s son is using his 3-D printer to make plastic face and eye shields for distribution. And a sewing circle that worked under the auspices of the nonprofit group that supports the county hospitals has shifted from helping to equip new mothers with necessities like burping cloths to sewing cloth masks from a pattern developed in consultation with the hospital’s medical personnel and guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Within 48 hours, the circle had grown to 150 sewers, who deliver the finished masks to a local trauma nurse in charge of quality control, said Amy Towner, the chief executive of the Health Care Foundation for Ventura County. She said sewers are innovating on the fly; after the hospitals’ laundry facilities said that elastic head bands would disintegrate with washing, they switched to a cloth tie-back pattern, and they are moving away from cotton to tea towel material after learning that would be more protective.

“A lot of our elderly population in particular want to help,” she said. “In World War II, women were making bullets to protect our country. Now they are at their sewing machines.”

Thomas Fuller reported from San Francisco and Tim Arango and Jo Becker from Los Angeles. Conor Dougherty contributed reporting from Oakland, Calif., and Jill Cowan from Los Angeles.

<|endoftext|>

There is a rhythm to it all, in happier times, a procession of dates and checkpoints to spread the politics and patriotism neatly across the calendar.

The presidential primaries tick past, Tuesday by Tuesday, through the spring. Former rivals hug it out at their party conventions in the summer. The Olympics bring the sides together, briefly, in merry distraction and shared cause before the fall. And then comes November, when half of the country is disappointed again.

So, what happens when immovable dates become negotiable — when everything does — in the throes of a pandemic? What must hold firm when nothing seems to?

Primaries are postponed. Hugs are postponed. The Olympics are postponed.

The November election, everyone appears to agree, cannot be.

“We voted in the middle of a Civil War,” Joseph R. Biden Jr., the heavy favorite for the Democratic nomination, told supporters at a tele-fund-raiser on Sunday. “We voted in the middle of World War I and II. And so, the idea of postponing the electoral process is just — seems to me, out of the question.”

And yet for weeks, the moment has delivered one reminder after the next of all that the crisis has made wobbly, all that seemed certain before certainty went into quarantine.

Dates exist in stone until they don’t. Younger people are spared the worst of the virus’s ravages until they aren’t. American ideals, in 2020, leave no room for the concession of mass death, surely. But then here is a White House now suggesting that the cure (stifling business for a period to encourage social distancing) cannot become worse than the disease (the disease).

The result is as disorienting as the messaging. What does progress look like when the healthiest course is collective stasis? What is there to drive toward, to look forward to, when the common benchmarks of the year — weddings, athletic seasons, state elections — seem to be punted further from reach?

“We’re not that familiar with a sense of tribulation as a part of daily life,” said Jill Lepore, a professor of history at Harvard University and author of “These Truths: A History of the United States.” “The basic American middle-class is not used to the idea that time could be moving backwards. And at the moment, what it feels like for most people is almost that time is standing still.”

Already, meaningful electoral proceedings have been delayed or recast. Many states have pushed their primaries into June in the hopes of waiting out the worst of the virus. Pennsylvania, slated for April 28, is likely to be next. Senator Bernie Sanders, Mr. Biden’s chief rival, has effectively converted his campaign into a pandemic policy shop and vessel for progressive activism as he confronts a significant delegate deficit. Planners for the Democratic National Convention said this week that they were assessing “contingency options” in case the July gathering cannot go on as planned.

But the general election is another matter. No one in a position of relevant authority has proposed moving it, though the subject has instantly become a cause of angst for President Trump’s critics. These fears seem to owe more to Mr. Trump’s attacks on democratic norms and institutions during his time in office than anything the president has said of late.

So far, Mr. Trump has appeared inclined to defy the guidance of public health experts by suggesting Americans return to their workplaces and public engagements well before the coronavirus has been tamed.

Even if he wished to delay the November election, the decision would appear to be out of his hands. Any change to the date would require federal legislation, passed by Congress, to say nothing of challenges in the court system.

The prospect of that kind of bipartisan collaboration on an issue of this magnitude is exceedingly slim.

Still, some academics have processed the official coronavirus response with alarm, warning that the present blend of institutional distrust and health-minded limits on personal liberties could prove dangerous.

“In the next months, defenders of democracy need to sustain this very careful balancing act between overreacting to justified emergency measures on the one side and not easily going along with real attacks on our democratic institutions on the other,” said Yascha Mounk, an associate professor at Johns Hopkins University who has written extensively about threats to liberal democracy. “That’s going to be incredibly difficult.”

Of heightened concern to some Democrats is the specter of state leaders citing the virus to impose voting constraints that might disproportionately affect left-leaning cities. “They will find a way to make it hard,” said Amanda Litman, the executive director of Run for Something, an organization that helps Democrats run for local office. “And we have to find a way to mitigate that as much as possible — at home, without a lot of funds.”

Even absent any cynical application of voting restrictions, some lawmakers worry that lingering civic confusion and uncertainty might hamper turnout with key constituencies.

On Tuesday, a group of House Democrats addressed a letter to the White House requesting a shelter-in-place order of at least two weeks for the entire country, arguing that such an approach made sense on both public safety and long-term economic grounds.

The note’s lead author, Representative Ro Khanna of California, said that part of the urgency flowed from a need to head off as many disruptions and complications as possible before November.

“Getting a shelter-in-place now for two to three weeks would mitigate the risk of having a catastrophe or re-emergence closer to November,” Mr. Khanna, a national campaign co-chair for Mr. Sanders, said in an interview.

He added that officials should be exploring alternatives to traditional voting like vote-by-mail wherever possible.

In the interim, Ms. Lepore, the historian, said it was dislocating enough merely fumbling through the unknown. “We keep saying around here in my household: ‘If we knew it was two weeks, we could pace ourselves,’” she said. “‘If we knew it was a month, we could pace ourselves.’” 

But then, what about six months? 

What about November?

<|endoftext|>

Hi. Welcome to On Politics, your guide to the day in national politics. I’m Nick Corasaniti, back in the seat as your host on Tuesdays for our coverage of all things media and messaging.

Sign up here to get On Politics in your inbox every weekday.

The presidential campaign has largely shifted to the recesses of public consciousness during the coronavirus outbreak. So, too, has political broadcast advertising: Since last Tuesday, Joe Biden, Bernie Sanders and President Trump haven’t aired a single ad on television.

It’s a difficult time for political campaigns to run paid messaging. Calls for unity to stop the pandemic are widespread, and candidates could be accused of politicizing a crisis if they put out attack ads.

But campaign rallies have been canceled, fund-raisers have been called off and in-person canvassing has been halted, all while Americans are spending more time indoors. With Mr. Trump on television constantly, Democratic strategists are worried that his unabated free airtime, even amid a crippling national crisis, gives him a messaging advantage.

In that vacuum, two Democratic groups have started multimillion-dollar advertising campaigns attacking Mr. Trump for his previous comments that played down the threat of the virus.

Priorities USA, one of the major Democratic super PACs, on Monday began a $6 million television and digital advertising campaign in four general election swing states — Florida, Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin — with multiple ads either criticizing Mr. Trump or trumpeting the record of Mr. Biden.

In one particularly stark ad, a line tracing the exponential growth of coronavirus cases in the United States creeps across the screen, as Mr. Trump can be heard saying, “We have it totally under control” and “One day, it’s like a miracle, it will disappear.” (Those quotations came from January and February; Mr. Trump has since tried to rewrite history by claiming he knew the virus would be a pandemic all along.)

The ad supporting Mr. Biden, which features the candidate proclaiming he would be “better prepared,” is the first such spot from Priorities USA, which had stayed neutral for most of the Democratic primary race but has since declared that it views Mr. Biden as the presumptive nominee.

Pacronym, a progressive super PAC, is in the middle of a $2.5 million digital ad campaign attacking Mr. Trump for his response to the coronavirus. That campaign began in mid-March and will run through the end of April, and the group said it planned to spend at least $5 million in total on digital ads by July.

The ads — which are running in Arizona as well as the same four states Priorities is targeting — are appearing on Facebook, YouTube, Hulu and other digital platforms, and feature a wide array of criticism.

The most recent one highlights criticism from Tucker Carlson, the Fox News host and frequent Trump booster, who has blamed “government incompetence” for a lack of preparedness for the pandemic in the United States.

“When voters consider who they want to be their next commander in chief, they’ll remember how the president’s chaotic administration, negligence and reckless behavior put our lives and economy at risk,” said Tara McGowan, Pacronym’s founder. “Pacronym will continue to make this case to voters online and reach them with facts about how this president is putting us all in harm’s way.”

Another Democratic super PAC, American Bridge, has started including coronavirus ads as part of an $850,000 digital ad campaign attacking Mr. Trump in Wisconsin, Pennsylvania and Michigan. On Facebook, where the group has spent nearly $86,000 in the past week, it is running multiple ads claiming Mr. Trump has “put American lives at risk” and calling out his past comments on the virus.

While it hasn’t put the same kind of money behind ads as Pacronym or Priorities USA, the Biden campaign has started to buy digital ads denouncing Mr. Trump and his approach to the outbreak.

In a Facebook ad shown to Wisconsin voters on Sunday, the Biden campaign ran a 90-second side-by-side comparison of Mr. Trump and Mr. Biden answering similar questions about the virus — choosing clips that showed Mr. Trump lashing out at reporters and Mr. Biden calmly delivering advice from the debate stage.

Mr. Trump, in his televised briefings and on Twitter, has repeatedly claimed that his administration has taken the virus seriously for months, pointing to his decision in late January to restrict travel from China, despite his many remarks minimizing the threat.

The Trump campaign, for its part, has been running a digital ad campaign from an almost parallel universe unaffected by the coronavirus, pitching a “gold card” for donors and selling campaign merchandise like “the EXCLUSIVE Trump Pence Keep America Great Dog Collar.”

Drop us a line!

We want to hear from our readers. Have a question? We’ll try to answer it. Have a comment? We’re all ears. Email us at onpolitics@nytimes.com.

Sometimes, the best messaging is a blunt object rather than a sharp tool. Mayors across Italy, frustrated with those who won’t stay home during the crisis, have been growing more direct in their instructions to constituents, as you can see in this video. (It includes some expletives.)

Thanks for reading. On Politics is your guide to the political news cycle, delivering clarity from the chaos.

On Politics is also available as a newsletter. Sign up here to get it delivered to your inbox.

Is there anything you think we’re missing? Anything you want to see more of? We’d love to hear from you. Email us at onpolitics@nytimes.com.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — One of the most contentious questions dogging talks over the $2 trillion economic stabilization bill revolves around how to ensure that such a sweeping bailout is administered fairly and without preferential treatment.

Democrats have made Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin the face of the bailout, warning that one of President Trump’s closest advisers should not be in charge of a $500 billion “slush fund” with few strings attached that could be used to unfairly benefit Mr. Trump or businesses that did not properly compensate their workers.

To prevent any favoritism, lawmakers and Mr. Mnuchin have agreed to essentially dust off the 2008 playbook for overseeing a giant government rescue program.

The final bill, which was still being negotiated late Tuesday, is expected to include the appointment of a new special inspector general to oversee the disbursement of funds to companies and ensure they qualify, according to a congressional aide.

The legislation would also create a five-person oversight panel, chosen by congressional leaders, that would monitor whether companies that received bailout money were living up to the obligations detailed in the bill to retain workers and limit executive pay. Mr. Mnuchin would be required to make regular appearances before Congress to discuss the bailout package and how it was being carried out.

Those guardrails are similar to what lawmakers put in place for the Troubled Asset Relief Program, the $700 billion bank bailout that Congress passed during the 2008 financial crisis. That bill created a special inspector general for the Troubled Asset Relief Program, or SIGTARP, as well as a congressional oversight panel that was led by Elizabeth Warren, now a Democratic senator from Massachusetts.

The quick injection of federal money into the economy, combined with a fast-moving public health crisis, means that opportunities for fraud will be rampant. An effective oversight mechanism will be crucial to ensuring that the vast injection of government money goes toward relieving the brunt of the economic fallout from the coronavirus pandemic.

“To me, one of the biggest disasters you can have with this is if either in reality or perception there are a handful of policymakers with no guidance and no guardrails picking winners and losers based on a criteria that is only known to themselves,” said Neil M. Barofsky, who was the first special inspector general of the $700 billion TARP bailout for banks.

Of the $2 trillion stimulus package, the pot of money that has received the most scrutiny is Treasury’s Exchange Stabilization Fund, which is traditionally used for managing currency markets.

The original Senate legislation set out $500 billion in funding to be used in support of companies and local governments, with $75 billion earmarked for airlines and national security companies at the Treasury secretary’s discretion. The remaining $425 billion was meant to be used to support Federal Reserve programs.

An ambiguity in the bill’s text could have allowed Mr. Mnuchin to use that money with considerable discretion, said Peter Conti-Brown, a lawyer and Fed historian at The Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania. He added that the ambiguity seemed like sloppy drafting rather than the intent.

The Republican bill alternately said the funds should be used “in support of” or “as part of” Fed programs; the latter would be much more limiting from the Treasury’s standpoint.

The compromise bill updated that language, so now the funds are specifically dedicated “to” Fed liquidity programs or facilities. “They’re trying to do this as a Fed-Treasury partnership,” Mr. Conti-Brown said, though he added that the new language went “sprinting in the other direction” of the earlier loophole and now left the Fed in charge.

Assuming that $425 billion is used purely to back Fed emergency lending programs, Mr. Mnuchin would have some — but not absolute — say over how the money is used.

The Treasury secretary legally must sign off on the Fed’s emergency lending programs. And in practice, the department has been financially backing the programs, agreeing to take the first round of losses if the interventions sour. As a result, Mr. Mnuchin will probably consult on program design, but the Fed does most of the legwork in setting up emergency lending facilities and administering them, according to lawyers who study the programs.

There are rules governing the Fed’s emergency lending. After the 2008 crisis, Congress insisted that the Fed must set up the programs to benefit broad groups of counterparties and not individual companies, for instance. That has been interpreted to mean that there must be five eligible participants.

Despite the additional oversight of how the bailout money is doled out, Mr. Mnuchin will still have broad discretion to pick winners and losers and to provide business to his friends on Wall Street. One provision of the legislation provides Mr. Mnuchin with $100 million in funds for hiring financial institutions to help manage Treasury’s services related to cities, states and businesses.

The funds could be used to hire Wall Street asset managers like BlackRock or banks like Goldman Sachs to administer the program or to hire people from financial firms to design it.

A draft of the legislation obtained by The New York Times on Tuesday afternoon said disclosure of the names of states, municipalities and cities that received federal money could be delayed by Mr. Mnuchin for up to six months. The comptroller general of the United States will also review the loans and provide reports to Congress.

Democrats remain concerned that even the most robust oversight panel could be rendered toothless by the Trump administration, which has defied congressional requests for information and challenged subpoenas for witnesses and documents.

“I think it’s an impossible task in terms of oversight,” said Barney Frank, the former Democratic congressman from Massachusetts who led the bailout negotiations in 2008. “This is a separation-of-powers problem.”

Mr. Trump did nothing to alleviate those concerns when asked on Monday evening about his Treasury Department having too much power to hand out money.

“Look,” he said. “I’ll be the oversight.”

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — When Ford’s chief executive, Jim Hackett, announced on Tuesday that the carmaker would team up with General Electric to build ventilators, he tempered the good news with a note of caution: “We’re talking about early June.”

That was just one of several examples that underscored the price of the Trump administration’s slow response to evidence as early as January that the coronavirus was headed to the United States.

For the first time, it is now possible to quantify the cost of the lost weeks, as President Trump was claiming as recently as February that in a “couple of days” the number of cases in the United States “is going to be down to close to zero.”

Ford’s timeline suggested that if the administration had reacted to the acute shortage of ventilators in February, the joint effort between Ford and General Electric might have produced lifesaving equipment sometime in mid- to late April.

A month later, the administration still does not appear to have a streamlined response to the pandemic. The chief of the Federal Emergency Management Agency said Tuesday that the administration would use the Defense Production Act, a Korean War-era law, to mandate the production of 60,000 coronavirus test kits. By Tuesday night, an agency spokeswoman said that the administration had been able to secure the tests without invoking the law.

The 60,000 tests are a tiny fraction of the tens of millions needed, and it raised the question whether the scarcity today would exist had the White House moved faster more than a month ago, after the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention fumbled its first effort to send out a test. Commercial laboratories could have produced their own tests earlier, according to industry officials, and governors have said that the wartime law would result in desperately needed equipment arriving in weeks, instead of months.

The gap between the production timelines and the need for immediate supplies led to a scathing assessment from Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York. New York accounts for more than 25,000 cases, more than half the total in the country, he said, but it has received only 400 ventilators from the federal government.

“You want a pat on the back for sending 400 ventilators?” Mr. Cuomo said. “What are we going to do with 400 ventilators when we need 30,000 ventilators? You’re missing the magnitude of the problem, and the problem is defined by the magnitude.”

Mr. Trump is caught between his desire to be proactive and optimistic, and the crushing realities of the numbers. For the past two weeks, the administration has usually avoided indicating the number of ventilators, masks or personal protective equipment that it has distributed. That changed on Monday, when Rear Adm. John P. Polowczyk, a senior logistics officer for the Joint Staff at the Pentagon, began specifying delivery quantities.

So far those figures have not compared the number of deliveries to the number of equipment needed. And that gap seems huge.

Mr. Cuomo crystallized the issue on Tuesday when he said that “the timeline doesn’t work.”

“I don’t need ventilators in six months,” he said. “And I don’t need ventilators in five months, four months or three months.”

The reality is that timing is impossible, producers of the equipment say. For example, Medtronic, one of the leading manufacturers of ventilators, now makes about 225 of its high-end machines each week, up from 100 in more normal times. But it is a daunting task because there are 1,500 unique parts supplied from 14 countries. The company is aiming for 500 a week, a Medtronic spokesman said. Even that would not satisfy current demand.

Last week, Mr. Trump urged states to fend for themselves, looking for whatever they could find on the open market. But that only underlined how poorly prepared federal stockpiles were for a pandemic — a situation that the last three administrations had rehearsed in an effort to improve plans. The president’s comments set off a scramble that only accelerated the criticism of how the White House has handled the allocation of scarce supplies.

Gov. J.B. Pritzker of Illinois, a Democrat, argued that in sending each of the states off to find their own equipment, “we’re competing against each other, we’re competing against other countries.” The result, he said, was “we’re overpaying.”

Mr. Trump responded that Mr. Pritzker and other governors “shouldn’t be blaming the federal government for their own shortcomings. We are there to back you up should you fail, and always will be!”

But it is increasingly clear that the federal government will not be able to back up the states, at least at the scale needed, for the first wave of patients. And by letting companies voluntarily produce the necessary equipment, rather than under orders in the Defense Production Act, the administration is not responsible for whether the quotas are met, or if the output reaches hospitals.

Ford’s new partnership with GE Healthcare and 3M aims to produce about 1,000 respirators a month, using fans from F-150 trucks, the most widely sold in the United States, and parts made on 3-D printers. But Mr. Hackett noted that those parts would have to be merged with electronics produced by other suppliers.

Plastic face shields, which are far less complex, will begin to be delivered this week in smaller quantities in Detroit, officials at Ford said, with a goal of producing 100,000 a week.

Confused by the terms about coronavirus testing? Let us help:

Peter Gaynor, the Federal Emergency Management Agency administrator, told CNN on Tuesday that the administration was only using the Defense Production Act when it was needed.

“So we’re going to use it, we’re going to use it when we need it and we’re going to use it today,” he said.

But Mr. Trump, who has favored relying on the volunteerism of companies to compile the medical equipment, was not aware that FEMA had been directed to use the law, according to an administration official. Later Tuesday, a FEMA spokeswoman said the administration had elected to get the tests from the private sector without using the act.

The spokeswoman, Lizzie Litzow, said in a text message that “at the last minute we were able to procure the test kits from the private market without evoking the DPA.” She said she did not know when those tests would be delivered.

While Mr. Trump signed an executive order last week invoking the law, he did not immediately use it. Instead, he elected to count on companies volunteering to make the equipment and materials. Mr. Trump said six million masks were donated to FEMA in recent days. But it is not clear if that is accurate, or when and where they will be delivered.

Industry officials have been in and out of the White House in recent days, trying to build a database of stockpiles and suppliers. But they said that system was largely being built from scratch.

“The federal government’s most urgent tasks is to accelerate the flow of vital supplies to our front line workers,’’ said Representative Elissa Slotkin, Democrat of Michigan, a former C.I.A. officer who is on the House Homeland Security Committee.

She said she was introducing legislation to require the administration to enforce the Defense Production Act. But that may well be for a future crisis, not this one.

Maggie Haberman contributed reporting.

<|endoftext|>

— Katie Ray-Jones, chief executive of the National Domestic Violence Hotline

[This article is a partnership between The New York Times and The Fuller Project. In Her Words is available as a newsletter. Sign up here to get it delivered to your inbox.]

Early last week, as the novel coronavirus exploded from state to state, a woman called the National Domestic Violence Hotline in a crisis: Her partner had tried to strangle her and she needed medical help, but feared going to the hospital because of the virus.

Another woman was being forced to choose between work and home. “He threatened to throw me out if I didn’t work from home,” she said. “He said if I started coughing, he was throwing me out in the street and that I could die alone in a hospital room.”

In another call, a girl — aged between 13 and 15 (specific identifiers have been removed to protect the callers) — said that her mother’s partner had just abused her mother, then gone on to abuse the girl herself. But with schools shut, turning to a teacher or a counselor for help was not an option.

These instances, gleaned from the hotline’s first responders, highlight two important facets of things to come during the coronavirus crisis. First, as lawmakers across the country order lockdowns to slow the spread of the virus, the lives of people stuck in physically or emotionally abusive relationships have — and will — become harder, which has already been seen in the pandemic hotspots of China and Italy.

Second, the virus raises the stakes for domestic violence services across the country as they scramble to adapt to a patchwork of new government policies and restrictions that shift day by day and vary from state to state.

“We know that any time an abusive partner may be feeling a loss of power and control — and everybody’s feeling a loss of power and control right now — it could greatly impact how victims and survivors are being treated in their homes,” said Katie Ray-Jones, chief executive of the hotline. 

She expects to see the intensity and frequency of abuse escalate, even if the number of individual cases doesn’t — a pattern that experts witnessed during the economic downturn of 2008 and immediately after 9/11, Hurricane Sandy and Hurricane Katrina.

In the U.S., more than one in three women has experienced rape, physical violence, and/or stalking by an intimate partner (defined as current or former spouses or partners) in their lifetime, according to a 2010 survey by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. And in recent years, the number of domestic violence cases (which includes violence by intimate partners and family members) has spiked, making up about 20 percent of all violent crimes in the U.S. in 2018, according to the Justice Bureau.

Spending days, weeks or even months in the presence of an abusive partner takes an immense emotional toll too, said Teresa Burns, who manages the Casa de Esperanza shelter in St. Paul, Minn. And that’s exactly the conditions that the coronavirus lockdown has set up.

Many of Burns’s clients are undocumented individuals whose immigration status can become a means of control by abusive partners. It’s not uncommon for abusers to claim that survivors will be deported if they seek help.

She fears these types of threats will escalate during the coronavirus crisis, and with information about the government’s response changing nearly by the hour, survivors may not know who or what to believe.

Those who may have felt safe once their partner left for work or their children were at school now live without any window of relief as businesses and schools shutter. “When the mind is constantly in fight, flight, freeze [mode] because of perpetual fear, that can have a lasting impact on a person’s mental health,” Burns said.

Shelters across the country are adapting as best they can while trying to keep pace with constantly changing virus regulations, including implementing social distancing practices on site, taking temperatures of newcomers and regularly cleaning and disinfecting common spaces.

In New York, now considered the epicenter of the virus in the U.S., shelters are categorized as essential services and are encouraged to keep functioning as normally as possible, even though many are at or almost at capacity, said Kelli Owens, executive director of the state’s Prevention of Domestic Violence office.

But several organizations have started to cut back on certain services and may have to turn away newcomers soon to avoid overcrowding at shelters. Drop-in counseling centers are shut down and in-person support groups are suspended.

One survivor, Maggie, 25, who spoke to The Times via Twitter, and is working to heal from an abusive relationship she left five years ago, said that in recent weeks, her weekly therapy appointment moved online and her support group was canceled altogether, which has made it even more difficult for her to cope with her increased isolation. As a result, she’s fallen back into unhealthy coping mechanisms, like drinking and smoking, she said.

“I imagine many survivors, even if they are safe in their home, are experiencing long hours of sitting alone with traumatic thoughts and nightmares due to increased anxiety,” Maggie said.

Advocates, who are often the first responders in cases of domestic violence, are fielding questions remotely, preparing those who can’t flee for worst case situations, known as safety planning.

“We’re having really difficult conversations, running through horrific scenarios,” Ray-Jones said.

“What that could mean is, OK, if an argument breaks out, where is the safest place in your house? Keep arguments out of the kitchen, out of the bathroom, which can be really dangerous spaces. If you need to go sleep in your car, is that a possibility?”

Organizations most often take these kinds of questions over the phone, but being in such proximity with an abuser can turn the simple act of a phone call into such a dangerous gamble that many are preparing for fewer calls on their hotline and more questions via their text and online chat services that are available around the clock.

Meanwhile, with courts closing across the country and advocates, who would typically help survivors navigate the judicial system, working remotely, yet another avenue of support for people experiencing abuse is further complicated, said Susan Pearlstein, the co-supervisor of the Family Law Unit of Philadelphia Legal Assistance.

Still, the public should know that obtaining a legal protection order is considered an essential service by most jurisdictions and “many courts are trying to have access open for domestic violence survivors and to allow order petitions of abuse or restraining orders to be filed,” either over the phone or via email, Pearlstein said.

“This is a really heartbreaking time,” said Ray-Jones, speaking to the overall heightened anxiety during this uncertain period.

Resources for victims and survivors:

Anti-Violence Project offers a 24-hour English/Spanish hotline for L.G.B.T.Q.+ experiencing abuse or hate-based violence: call 212-714-1141

The National Domestic Violence Hotline is available around the clock and in more than 200 languages: call 1-800-799-SAFE or chat with their advocates here or text LOVEIS to 22522.

New York State Domestic and Sexual Violence Hotline is available in multiple languages: call 1-800-942-6906 for English. For deaf or hard of hearing: 711

For immediate dangers, call 911.





<|endoftext|>

Chris Jackson was halfway through his overnight shift sorting the mail for delivery when he and several colleagues were summoned into a windowless conference room.

The senior manager of the mail facility was there along with a representative from the union and other postal officials.

They confirmed the rumors that had been swirling all night. One of their colleagues in the Bethlehem, Pa., mail facility had Covid-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus.

They gave the staff the option of going home, and about half did. But the facility was not going to shut down. Instead, they set up cones around the area where the sick worker had been, and the overnight crew continued until dawn preparing the mail to be sent to people’s homes.

“They said we need to have the delivery trucks out there,” Mr. Jackson said. “They said delivery trucks really instill confidence that it’s business as usual, that the mail is still getting to you.”

Neither sleet, nor snow — nor the coronavirus. With tens of millions of people across huge swaths of the country on state-ordered lockdown, the mail has remained one of the few physical tethers to the wider world. Medicine, packages bought online, at-home coronavirus tests, even mail-in presidential ballots — all require a reliable federal mail system.

But mail delivery requires a healthy work force, and postal workers have been falling sick across the country — Miami, Manhattan, Seattle, Portland and more have reported sick workers, according to Paul Hogrogian, national president of the National Postal Mail Handlers Union.

On Thursday, 13 postal workers had tested positive; by Friday, that number was 20, including the one from the Bethlehem facility where Mr. Jackson works, according to Mr. Hogrogian. On Sunday, postal officials in Washington said the number was “fewer than 30.”

With a work force of 630,000, those numbers are still relatively small, but they are expected to keep rising in the coming days and weeks. Mr. Jackson and other rank-and-file workers worry that the Postal Service is not doing enough to protect them, and that they could become unwitting carriers of the virus.

“They had no plan and they weren’t proactive at all,” Mr. Jackson said. “It was just crazy to me.”

FedEx and UPS workers are facing similar fears that their warehouses were contaminated or soon will be.

When Mr. Jackson returned to work the night after the meeting, he said, the cones had been removed from the sick worker’s station and the crew was expected to keep going. Another Bethlehem colleague, Sean Craig, said he was continuing to report for work but was worried about his infant son and his 82-year-old mother.

“The concern is there just wasn’t a plan in place,” Mr. Craig said. “It was fly by the seat of your pants, which made me very angry.”

Mr. Craig and his colleagues have the option of staying at home and using their sick days or vacation days if they feel uncomfortable working. One employee reported for duty at 10 p.m., learned that a colleague had fallen sick, and was out the door by 10:30 p.m., Mr. Jackson said.

Those that stayed debated whether they should use their time now, or bank their sick days in case things become even worse. Mr. Jackson reasoned that since he is 34, healthy and lives alone, he could afford the risk. “We haven’t hit the peak yet so let’s work through this right now,” he said, reflecting the view of some of his colleagues.

But he said he felt like the nonessential parts of his job should be jettisoned to focus on delivering important goods and products. “We’re still sending brochures for cruise trips, thousands of them,” he said. “This doesn’t need to happen.”

In a message to postal employees last week, Megan J. Brennan, the postmaster general, said that “there is no evidence the virus can spread through the mail.” A recent study in The New England Journal of Medicine suggests that the virus disintegrates over the course of a day on cardboard.

But direct handling of the mail is only one aspect of the job inside postal facilities. Hundreds of people rotate through most warehouses, handling equipment, loading trucks, preparing the mail to be delivered door-to-door by letter carriers who in turn fan out to homes across their area. That leaves plenty of opportunities to spread the disease, Mr. Jackson said, and there has not been enough planning or support.

“A lot of people asked, would they shut down the building for cleaning? Not an option,” he said.

As for letter carriers who go door to door, new rules are quickly taking hold. Letter carriers walking up to people’s doorsteps are instructed to “politely ask the customer to step back a safe distance,” and to ask for their name instead of requesting their signature.

Mr. Hogrogian, the union president, said he had been in direct conversation with senior postal officials about how to protect his people. The most glaring gap, he said, was that sometimes it took several days for officials to identify the people who had been in close contact with those who have tested positive.

“If they can’t determine who’s been in close contact for three or four days,” he said, “that’s three or four more days that employees are allowed to work.”

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — President Trump’s campaign rallies have been canceled for the foreseeable future. His noisy back-and-forths with reporters on the South Lawn, half drowned out by the whir of Marine One behind him, have also disappeared.

And with almost no meetings or foreign leaders visiting the Oval Office, Mr. Trump can no longer invite the news media to view him at work — photo ops that doubled as chances for him to engage in impromptu question-and-answer sessions with the news media that he could end on his own terms.

Instead, Mr. Trump, who has always scripted his presidency like a reality show, has found his new favorite stage: the dust-covered briefing room, unused since Sarah Huckabee Sanders, his previous press secretary, ended daily sessions with reporters.

“I’ve gotten to like this room,” Mr. Trump said, though he had virtually shut it down for months.

Now, the briefings offer him a unique perch from which he can try to rebrand himself as a “wartime president” and demonstrate his focus on a pandemic he only weeks ago dismissed.

The regular briefings by the administration’s coronavirus task force were originally run by Vice President Mike Pence with the purpose of transmitting to a scared public important health information that could help flatten the curve.

“Washing your hands with hot soap and water, 20 seconds, is just as good as any lotion you can buy,” Mr. Pence said at a briefing this month, the kind of direction he often gave with a paternally calm presence.

But without any of Mr. Trump’s usual outlets available, and competitive as he watched Mr. Pence get good marks for how he handled the White House response, the president has taken over the briefing himself, using it as a venue not just to talk about the virus but to vent his grievances against the news media and tout what he claims is his own stellar job performance.

And he has repeatedly made inaccurate claims about everything from the availability of testing kits and face masks to the timeline for a coronavirus vaccine that task force members standing behind him have sometimes felt compelled to later correct.

As Mr. Trump has attacked critics and conveyed false information, cable networks have been criticized for carrying his briefings live and in their entirety; they often last for up to 90 minutes, about the same length as a Trump rally. On Sunday, for instance, Mr. Trump couldn’t resist a scornful aside when a reporter noted that Senator Mitt Romney of Utah, the sole Republican who voted to impeach him on one count, was quarantined.

“Romney’s in isolation? Gee, that’s too bad,” Mr. Trump said sarcastically.

The experts behind him often try to convey no reaction or emotion on their faces as the president riffs, and they wait their turns to convey more details and information.

The journalist James Fallows noted on Twitter that the cable networks were “repeating the mistake they made w wall-to-wall coverage of rallies in 2015 and 2016. W/o live coverage, Trump will stop showing up; scientists can speak.”

And public health experts have questioned the kind of example set by packing clusters of officials into a small space that does not allow for the 6-foot-apart spacing recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

“I keep saying, is there any way we can get a virtual news conference,” Dr. Anthony Fauci, one of the briefing regulars, said in an interview with Science magazine. “Thus far, no. But when you’re dealing with the White House, sometimes you have to say things one, two, three, four times, and then it happens. So I’m going to keep pushing.”

The White House disputed Dr. Fauci’s assertion that he had lobbied for another setup. “I’ve never heard anyone suggest doing a virtual briefing,” said Judd Deere, a White House spokesman.

The dangers of the current setup became apparent on Monday, when the president of the White House Correspondents’ Association, Jonathan Karl of ABC News, said a journalist who had been at the White House as recently as March 18 had a “suspected case of Covid-19.” Mr. Karl said that in response, the W.H.C.A. was switching to “expanded pool” coverage of the briefings, which shrunk the number of reporters allowed in the briefing room to 14 from 25. It also raised the question of how much longer Mr. Trump would continue.

Dr. Fauci's critique resonated with Mr. Trump’s allies as well as his detractors. Sean Spicer, a former White House press secretary who during his tenure instituted “Skype seats” to allow smaller outlets without a Washington-based correspondent to ask questions during his briefings, said the idea still made sense.

Mr. Spicer, who attended a briefing last week in his new role as a host on the conservative site Newsmax and was called on by Mr. Trump, said “safety should be a massive factor” for the current format.

David Axelrod, a former top adviser to President Barack Obama, said accurate briefings during a crisis like the pandemic were critical. But he said the current state of play at the White House failed not only in accuracy but in optics.

“Not only is it unhealthy for the people in the room,” Mr. Axelrod said, “it sends a mixed message to the American people. Even if the briefings were held in the East or State Rooms, where people could be spaced, it would be better.”

Aides said Mr. Trump viewed the iconic room, with its blue seats and imposing White House seal behind the podium, as his best stage, one that gives him an imprimatur that cannot be replicated by any of his Democratic presidential opponents or governors like Andrew Cuomo of New York.

Mr. Cuomo has received high marks for an informative and emotional daily briefing he has been delivering from the State Capitol in Albany, which the president has closely watched and studied.

Some Trump advisers have struggled to find a good slot for the timing of the president’s briefings. Their preference would be to hold them earlier in the day, but Mr. Trump prefers getting closer to prime-time hours, and Mr. Cuomo’s briefings already dominate the mornings.

The format for the briefing has taken shape somewhat organically after the president studied Mr. Cuomo and Mr. Pence.

It takes place immediately after the president has met with members of the task force, although at times Mr. Trump has sought to push it back for a better time slot. Aides put together what they refer to as a topper: a brief written statement that Mr. Trump reads before transitioning into his more comfortable, freelancing mode.

Mr. Trump does not rehearse, aides said, and it shows. He often reads from a binder in front of him with little effect, sometimes tripping on the words as if he has not yet reviewed them. Sometimes, he adds his own edits to the draft printed out for him in large type by his advisers. Last week, a Washington Post photographer captured an image that showed that Mr. Trump had crossed out the word “corona” and replaced it in his signature Sharpie with “Chinese” virus.

Dr. Fauci, in his interview with Science, described what has become the daily routine: “We go in to see the president, we present [our consensus] to him and somebody writes a speech. Then he gets up and ad-libs on his speech. And then we’re up there to try and answer questions.”

White House officials said the more conversational style of the briefing room worked better for Mr. Trump than a formal Oval Office address, like the one he gave this month that was rife with inaccuracies and widely considered a disaster even inside the West Wing.

Mr. Trump has been enlivened by the briefings, his aides said. While Mr. Cuomo has limited the number of administration officials who can attend his daily briefing to those who are directly involved in the coronavirus response, Mr. Trump has been eager for a live audience.

Last week, he asked his daughter Ivanka Trump, who has no role in the administration’s response to the coronavirus and does not sit on its task force, to sit and watch the briefing. Her silent presence in a chair to the side confused reporters.

Maggie Haberman contributed reporting from New York.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — Planners for the Democratic National Convention are looking at “contingency options” in case the mid-July gathering in Milwaukee can’t take place because of the coronavirus, officials said on Monday for the first time.

“As we navigate the unprecedented challenge of responding to the coronavirus, we’re exploring a range of contingency options to ensure we can deliver a successful convention without unnecessary risk to public health,” said Katie Peters, a convention spokeswoman. “This is a very fluid situation — and the convention is still more than three months away. We are committed to sharing updates with the public in the coming weeks and months as our plans continue to take shape.”

One person with knowledge of the discussions said Monday that “intensive scenario-planning” was taking place among officials from the Democratic National Committee, the convention committee and the Milwaukee host committee, who were all determining what to do about the convention, which is scheduled for July 13 to July 16 at the Fiserv Forum in Milwaukee. 

Among the complicating factors are the uncertain nature of the professional basketball season — the arena hosting the convention is home to the Milwaukee Bucks, a top N.B.A. team likely to play deep into the playoffs if the league’s season were to restart — and how the party’s delegates will be selected. Delegates in most states are elected to the national convention from state conventions, but many state conventions, scheduled for late spring and early summer, are also being postponed. 

Convention planning is also hamstrung by the fact that as long as Senator Bernie Sanders remains in the race, Democrats do not yet have a de facto presidential nominee. Former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., who has an all but insurmountable delegate lead, cannot take the reins of the convention process until either Mr. Sanders concedes or Mr. Biden reaches a 1,991-delegate threshold. 

Mr. Biden cannot accumulate more delegates until more states hold their nominating contests. With many states postponing their primaries, it would be impossible for Mr. Biden to reach 1,991 delegates before June, even if he won all of the delegates in each of the upcoming primaries and caucuses. 

A memo sent Friday from the leaders of the D.N.C.’s Rules and Bylaws Committee said 18 states and Democrats Abroad had proposed changing delegate selection plans previously submitted to and approved by the D.N.C. 

The proposed changes articulated in the memo include moving dates of state party conventions where national convention delegates are selected, modifying state party rules that govern the delegate selection process to allow proxy voting, and allowing “other methods in the steps to select national convention delegates while implementing social distancing in their state.” 

Democratic officials said no major corporate donors had rescinded financial pledges to the convention, but one person involved in fund-raising for the event described the convention’s fund-raising status as “frozen.” 

Another person involved in planning the convention said there was still time to make key decisions and emphasized that the party would have some flexibility because members of the Lasry family, which owns the Milwaukee Bucks and controls the Fiserv Forum, are significant Democratic Party donors. 

<|endoftext|>

With the coronavirus pandemic spreading rapidly across the country, millions of Americans are being told by state and county officials to take refuge at home, and only venture out to get things they really need. Groceries, naturally. Prescription drugs, of course. Gas for the car. Urgent medical care.

And in many places, marijuana makes the list.

Over the past week, more than a dozen states have agreed that while “nonessential” stores had to close, pot shops and medical marijuana dispensaries could remain open — official recognition that for some Americans, cannabis is as necessary as milk and bread.

In most cases, the marijuana businesses must, like restaurants, limit themselves to taking orders for delivery or curbside pickup.

As Americans have raced in recent weeks to stock up on supplies like toilet paper, canned goods and hand sanitizer, many who live in states where marijuana has been legalized — including California, Oregon and Michigan — also rushed to buy enough cannabis products to last them through weeks, if not months, of hunkering down at home.

After a stay-at-home order was issued to San Francisco Bay Area residents last week, marijuana sales soared more than 150 percent over the same period a year earlier, said Liz Connors, director of analytics at Headset, a cannabis market research company. She said purchases of edibles like gummy candies surged to levels typically only seen around April 20, or “4/20,” the annual, if unofficial, marijuana appreciation holiday.

Women and young people — Generation Z — accounted for much of the sales growth, according to Headset.

“It shows that a lot of people think cannabis is just another consumer good, like beer or wine,” said Ms. Connors, who noted that edible products may have been the most popular because customers were taking precautions to avoid infection. “It’s probably the easiest way to get high without touching your face very much,” she said.

On Monday, the mayor of Denver included liquor stores and recreational marijuana shops among the nonessential businesses he ordered to close on Tuesday for the next three weeks, prompting long lines to form outside some stores. Medical marijuana dispensaries, however, were exempt. But after an outcry, the city reversed the ban a few hours later.

Pennsylvania has allowed marijuana dispensaries to continue operating, though liquor stores were ordered closed. But many states, including New York, have decided that liquor stores are essential businesses, too, and could remain open. Alabama issued an emergency order allowing curbside sales of alcoholic beverages at licensed stores.

Over the last week, marijuana sales have soared in many states, including California, Colorado, Washington and Pennsylvania, where Ilera Healthcare, a dispensary in the town of Plymouth Meeting, had its biggest week ever, according to Greg Rochlin, the company’s chief executive.

“People were concerned we would be shut down,” Mr. Rochlin said, comparing the rush on marijuana to “hoarding toilet paper.”

But while toilet paper has sometimes been nearly impossible to find in grocery stores and pharmacies, Ilera Healthcare has not run out of pot.

transcript

Marijuana: Uncertain Medicine

In many states, marijuana is now considered medicine. 

But it does not arrive at the dispensary in standardized formulations and doses, and its effects on an individual can be difficult to predict.

For starters, there is the way you consume the drug. When smoked, cannabis takes effect within minutes. When eaten, it can take over an hour for the effects to set in, and they may last much longer.  

Now, marijuana businesses and users commonly distinguish between two types of cannabis plants and hybrids of the two: cannabis sativa and cannabis indica. 

Physically the plants are quite different. Cannabis sativa has thin, lanky stems and narrow leaves. Cannabis indica is a stocky, smaller plant with stubby leaves. 

And many users report that the plants deliver distinct highs as well. 

Sativa strains are said to produce a high that is energetic, euphoric and cerebral. Indica delivers what some users describe as a “body buzz,” which may help medical patients manage pain. 

Scientists are not quite sure of what to make of this distinction and the anecdotal evidence that supports it. After all, research into cannabis is still in its infancy, in part because federal restrictions have held it back for decades. 

Experts say that THC, the psychoactive compound in marijuana, induces the high. But THC alone could not explain the difference between a stimulating and a sedative high.

One hypothesis is that the varying effects result from the interaction of THC with other chemical compounds in the plant. This is known as the “entourage effect.”  

Of course, each user’s genetic profile also influences her reaction to cannabis and THC. In that way, marijuana is no different than two other substances Americans use every day: caffeine and alcohol.

In many states, cannabis businesses are being careful to adhere to standards defined by the federal government to ensure they are deemed essential and can remain open. Nevada regulators have allowed recreational stores and dispensaries to operate as long as they prevent crowds from forming, so the stores have urged customers to order online or over the phone. Illinois halted recreational weed sales but authorized medical marijuana patients to pick up orders curbside or in parking lots.

Mindful of rules on social distancing and eager to attract anxious customers, many pot shops and dispensaries have sought to adapt by offering more deliveries and changing their practices.

Curaleaf, which runs 53 dispensaries in 17 states, is setting aside the first hour of operations each day for customers who are 60 or older. It also has created an app, available in Maryland, New Jersey and Nevada, that lets customers wait in their cars for their turn to shop, rather than stand in line outside the store.

Despite high demand, however, not all states that have ordered business closures because of the virus outbreak are allowing legal marijuana businesses to continue to serve customers.

When Gov. Charlie Baker of Massachusetts announced that all nonessential businesses must close on Tuesday, he allowed medical dispensaries to stay open but not recreational pot shops.

Jackie Subeck, a cannabis industry consultant in Los Angeles, said she planned to restock her personal supply this week, out of concern that California may soon enforce even more restrictions over the coronavirus.

At the same time, she said she was worried the marijuana supply chain might soon dry up because the masks and gloves that workers in the legal industry are required to wear are now in short supply.

“I want to make sure I have enough to maintain my daily lifestyle,” she said. “For me, it’s more important to have enough cannabis around than alcohol.”

Not surprisingly, black-market pot dealers have also been doing a brisk business during the crisis, and unlike legal sellers, they feel little need to abide by official orders. One dealer in New York City said sales suddenly picked up two weeks ago when residents began to grow more nervous about imminent social distancing restrictions. “People were coming out of the woodwork,” said the dealer, who asked to be identified only by his first name, Chris, to avoid trouble with the police.

He has since sold out of marijuana candies, and said he was constantly getting calls for more weed. Customers no longer like to hang out in his apartment or let him linger during deliveries, he said. And he related how a couple showed up outside his building recently wearing masks and gloves, handed him a box of disinfectant wipes with the cash hidden inside, and drove off after he tossed their order into their car through an open window.

Still, he said, many of his customers have confided that buying marijuana was worth the close contact, if only to relieve their anxiety.

“They’ll say things like, ‘I’m going to be locked up with my wife for the next-God-knows-how-long and need this desperately.’” he said.

<|endoftext|>

This is the Coronavirus Briefing, an informed guide to the global outbreak. Sign up here to get the briefing by email.

By Patrick J. Lyons

The Senate kept wrangling over a $1.8 trillion economic stabilization package, after Democrats blocked a version that they said did not provide adequate protection for workers.

Prime Minister Boris Johnson put Britain under tight nationwide movement restrictions and ordered most stores to close.

New York State now has more than 20,000 confirmed cases — about 6 percent of the global tally.

Get the latest updates here, plus maps and full coverage

The wrangling on Capitol Hill over a $1.8 trillion package of measures to aid the stalling economy continued on Monday, after Democrats again blocked a version of the package that they said offered too little protection for workers and too much potential for abuse by big business.

Tempers flared in the Senate as the Republican leadership scheduled votes without reaching a deal with Democrats. Each side accused the other of playing partisan games. Talks were set to continue into the evening.

If it passes, the package could provide direct payments of up to $1,200 to many taxpayers, as well as money to expand unemployment benefits and a number of aid provisions for businesses and farmers.

The lack of a deal during the day disappointed Wall Street. The S&P 500 index fell about 3 percent, adding to a 15 percent plunge last week.

The Times is providing free access to much of our coronavirus coverage, and our Coronavirus Briefing newsletter — like all of our newsletters — is free. Please consider supporting our journalism with a subscription.

China and some of its Asian neighbors have shown that with furious efforts, the contagion can be brought to heel. Our science reporter Donald G. McNeil Jr. spoke to a dozen leading epidemic-fighting experts last week about what it would take for the U.S. and other countries to do the same.

Much of what they recommended was to move faster and on a far larger scale: more testing, more ventilators, more hospital capacity, more limits on travel and gatherings, swifter development of treatments and a vaccine.

Here are three of the more unexpected takeaways that could slow the pandemic:

Though a few people catch the virus from random strangers, many more cases are arising within clusters of family members, friends and work colleagues. No one knows yet why this is so, but the experts see it as an opening.

“You can contain clusters,” Dr. David L. Heymann said. “You need to identify and stop discrete outbreaks, and then do rigorous contact tracing.”

Easier said than done, though: “Doing so takes intelligent, rapidly adaptive work by health officials, and near-total cooperation from the populace,” Donald explains.

Americans must be persuaded to stay home, the experts told Donald. But that’s not enough.

Instead of advising the infected to remain at home, as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention now does, the experts said that people with the virus should be isolated and cared for away from those they were most likely to pass the virus to — their families.

For most patients, a cross between a dormitory and a first-aid clinic, supervised by nurses, would do, along the lines of the “temporary hospitals” that Wuhan, China, had set up.

There is little evidence that walking around in a flat surgical mask gives a healthy person much protection — which is why many officials have said not to bother. But the experts Donald spoke to all agreed that it was important for all sick people to wear them to contain their coughs.

How do you achieve that, if wearing a mask marks you out as infected? The lesson from Asia, the experts told Donald, is to make masks mandatory for everybody. Then the sick automatically have one on, and there is no stigma attached. “The Asian approach is less about data than it is about crowd psychology,” he writes.

There is growing anecdotal evidence that anosmia — loss of the sense of smell — is an indicator of a Covid-19 infection.

The symptom was reported in 30 percent of cases in a large-scale study in South Korea — as well as by patients in Italy, China and Germany.

Sarah Maslin Nir, a New York Times reporter who covered the outbreak in New Rochelle, N.Y., lost her sense of smell last week, and later tested positive for the coronavirus. She shared her experience with us. Here is a condensed version of our interview.

When did you notice that you couldn’t smell?

I had a socially distant lunch with a friend on Perry Street, at opposite ends of a stoop, and she passed me some Clorox wipes. And I thought, Unscented Clorox wipes? That’s weird. But then I looked at them, and they said “lemon scent.”

I quickly made my exit, because I remembered reading an article about two Chinese health care workers and one sentence stuck out to me, that one of the women lost her sense of taste and smell. I went home, got my godmother on FaceTime, opened my spice cupboard and tried sniffing all the spices. I sliced fresh ginger and practically put it up my nose, and couldn’t smell it.

Is anosmia your only symptom?

I don’t have a cough or a fever, but I’m exhausted. And because I can’t smell, food is bland. Eggplant Parmesan tastes like a hot wet book.

How would you describe anosmia to others?

It’s deeply unsettling. It’s a constant reminder that something is deeply wrong with your body. You can perk up and have a good moment or two, but then you eat your Cheerios and your heart misses a beat.

Advice from medical professionals: If you lose your sense of smell, it could be a sign that you are infected. You should isolate at home for at least seven days, even if you don’t have any other symptoms.

The Times sent dozens of photographers out to capture images of once-bustling public plazas, train stations and tourist meccas around the world, now virtually abandoned.

“Their present emptiness, a public health necessity, can conjure up dystopia,” writes Michael Kimmelman, our architecture critic. “But, promisingly, it also suggests that, by heeding the experts and staying apart, we have not yet lost the capacity to come together for the common good.”

And the not-so-empty: Though several major cities were locked down this weekend, people across much of the U.S., from Florida beaches to California mountains, dismissed the growing demands to stop congregating, John Branch reports.

In Italy, where cases have surged to nearly 60,000, with more than 5,400 deaths, doctors have been forced to make life-or-death decisions.

Twelve percent of Spain’s more than 33,000 cases are health care workers.

Indiana, Massachusetts, Michigan, Wisconsin, West Virginia and Oregon became the latest states to announce broad restrictions to keep people home.

Most of India is under stay-at-home restrictions, over concerns that the 500 cases it has so far could rapidly balloon.

Can you catch the virus through food? There’s currently no evidence that you can. But J. Kenji López-Alt, a Times columnist, recommends limiting your human contacts when getting the food: Choose delivery over takeout, and small local grocers over big stores if you can, he advises in Serious Eats.

Skip the supplements: Vitamins, herbs, extracts and cold and flu remedies haven’t been shown to ward off the coronavirus or help you get over it any faster — but large doses could do harm.

Can you go out for a jog? Probably. Most areas under stay-at-home orders allow outdoor exercise, provided you do it alone. But skip the public drinking fountain.

Should you flee to somewhere remote? First, consider whether you would actually be safer there, especially if medical services are limited. If you do go, Jodi Kantor, a Times investigative reporter, writes in our new column, Dilemmas, that you should drive directly there and then immediately self-quarantine: The person who brings the virus may be you.

See how the movements of hundreds of millions of people allowed the virus outbreak to become a pandemic.

Invisible pathogens have been a recurring source of human despair and destruction. We gathered photos chronicling a century of epidemics, from influenza to AIDS to Ebola.

Prime Minister Justin Trudeau of Canada has taken on single parenthood and housekeeping while leading his country, since his wife tested positive for the virus.

With President Trump calling it the “Chinese virus” and bigots yelling and spitting at them on the street, many Chinese-Americans say they are terrified of what could come next.

The retired NASA astronaut Scott Kelly, who spent almost a year on the International Space Station, has some tips for isolation: Go outside, get into a routine and keep a journal.

Researchers have identified nearly 70 drugs that might be effective in treating the coronavirus.

DISCO! In complete physical isolation for two weeks, we can’t leave the house for any reason. Dancing is my way of getting some exercise. My playlist always starts with “Stayin’ Alive” (Bee Gees) and ends with “I Will Survive” (Gloria Gaynor).

— Kathy Cuda, Italy

Let us know how you’re dealing with the outbreak. Send us a response here, and we may feature it in an upcoming newsletter.

Sign up here to get the briefing by email.

Lara Takenaga and Jonathan Wolfe contributed to today’s newsletter.

<|endoftext|>

SEATTLE — Groups representing people with disabilities on Monday challenged a plan that would guide hospitals in Washington State dealing with the coronavirus in the event that they do not have enough lifesaving resources for all the patients who need them.

The triage care plan could result in end-of-life decisions that disadvantage those with disabilities, said David Carlson, the director of advocacy at Disability Rights Washington. The group’s complaint calls for the federal government to quickly intervene to investigate, issue findings and make sure that doctors and hospitals do not discriminate against people with disabilities when making treatment decisions.

“Washington’s rationing scheme places the lives of disabled people at serious risk,” the advocacy groups wrote in the complaint to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services’ Office for Civil Rights.

State officials and other health leaders around the country have developed triage strategies over the years to help guide hospitals during a crisis situation where they exceed capacity. Officials in Washington State have held discussions over the past week to prepare hospitals for the possibility they may have to put them into practice, fearing that a rush of coronavirus cases in the coming days could leave them with a shortage of crucial pieces of lifesaving equipment, such as ventilators.

The complaint in Washington State was the first to be filed, but advocates for people with disabilities said they expect to scrutinize similar triage plans around the country to see if they provide equal access to lifesaving care.

The federal government “has a very brief moment to intercede,” the complaint said. If it does not, it said, “there will be no way to undo the lethal outcome of the discriminatory plans that have been formulated without O.C.R.’s guidance.”

Washington State’s triage document includes a range of factors for hospitals to consider in deciding who gets complete care. Much of the effort focuses on prioritizing people who have a better chance of survival, and among the factors it calls for hospitals to consider are a patient’s “baseline functional status” and indications of declines in energy, physical ability and cognition.

Mr. Carlson said that wording concerned him, leaving it open to doctors to make quality-of-life judgments that would place people with disabilities at a disadvantage. He also noted that the document says doctors should consider underlying diseases that have a low likelihood of short-term survival in deciding whether those patients should receive scarce medical resources. That could affect people who have ailments such as cystic fibrosis, he said.

“We are in some urgent times,” Mr. Carlson said. “These are not the times to throw out our core principles of fairness and equality. We don’t want to look back on these times like we have on other times when we’ve had great fear.”

The state’s Department of Health did not immediately return a message seeking comment on the complaint.

State officials have expressed hope that the health system would be able to handle all the coronavirus patients expected to need aid. As Washington State became a center of the virus this month, officials were the first in the United States to implement some of the most sweeping social-distancing strategies to limit the spread of the virus, and health leaders have begun developing new extra hospital capacity, including at a field hospital on a soccer field north of Seattle.

<|endoftext|>

Good morning.

(If you don’t already get California Today delivered free to your inbox, here’s the sign-up.)

Over the weekend, roughly 40 million Californians adjusted to life under a sweeping new order to stay at home, even as questions lingered about what, exactly, that means.

For small businesses, there was plenty of confusion over how it was determined whether they were essential.

[What does it mean to shelter in place?]

My colleagues Conor Dougherty and Thomas Fuller reported that even in the Bay Area, already several days into its massive containment experiment, there was plenty of room for interpretation.

Rather than get bogged down in questions, Matt Haney, a member of the San Francisco board of supervisors, said he’s advising businesses to simply think of the common good.

On Wednesday, a gin distillery that had been deemed as nonessential asked him if it could convert into a factory that makes hand sanitizer.

In normal times, Mr. Haney said, that request would be met with various permitting requests and neighborhood and civic meetings that together would take months or years to satisfy, if it was possible at all. His advice: If you’re able to make hand sanitizer, then do it.

[What does it mean to call in the National Guard?]

“There’s no decision maker in an office somewhere stamping expedited permits,” he said. “There’s a wartime feel to it, where if you are doing something that is contributing to public health then that’s the right thing to do.”

Local leaders have been emphasizing that they don’t want to punish people who violate the restrictions.

But they’ve said that as they’ve encountered residents or businesses not complying, enforcement is likely to ramp up.

The police chief of San Jose, Eddie Garcia, said Friday that his officers had already broken up gatherings in the city. The city also ordered a gun shop closed earlier this week. (Gun shops were declared nonessential by Mayor Sam Liccardo.)

Chief Garcia said he was incredulous at some of the businesses that tried to stay open.

“A billiards hall. Are you kidding me?” he said. “I don’t know how a billiards hall thought they could be open through this time.”

[Here’s what to know before you go to the grocery store.]

As the weekend wore on, big outdoor spaces — explicitly exempted from new restrictions — were crowded with people grasping for some sense of normalcy.

In the East Bay, The San Francisco Chronicle reported, parks and beaches were so packed that officials may be forced to close some of them.

San Diegans flocked to beaches and parks, according to The San Diego Union-Tribune, prompting county health officials to plead with residents to stay home.

In Malibu on Saturday, hikers on a wide trail mostly edged away from one another as they passed, even if their ecstatic dogs played together under a clear blue sky. Some, however, walked in larger groups down the center of the path.

A group of young roommates narrated their walk to a phone. An older woman wore a T-shirt that read, “Stay Away,” written in marker, accented by a hand-drawn heart.

[Read about how warmer weather may slow, but not stop, the spread of the coronavirus.]

Mayor Eric Garcetti of Los Angeles said on Sunday that after seeing the flood of people heading toward the water in Venice, he’d be working with other leaders around the county to close beach parking lots, and if necessary, close off beaches altogether.

“Your decision to not physically distance yourself may kill someone,” he said. “Don’t take risks, don’t mess around, don’t be selfish.”

[Check here for statistics and more information about the coronavirus outbreak in California.]

Here’s more about which businesses are considered essential:

On Friday, after the statewide stay-at-home order went into effect, officials posted a longer document laying out which workers and businesses are considered essential and how they’d be allowed to operate.

Among the businesses that will be allowed to keep operating are convenience stores that sell food, liquor stores, cannabis dispensaries and laundromats.

You can read the list in full here, though state officials have said the directive could evolve in days and weeks to come.

[Read more about which industries and companies are hiring — a lot.]

We often link to sites that limit access for nonsubscribers. We appreciate your reading Times coverage, but we also encourage you to support local news if you can.

President Trump approved a major disaster declaration that Mr. Newsom had requested earlier on Sunday. The move will bring more federal resources to help California fight the Covid-19 outbreak.

Pacific Gas & Electric reached a deal with the governor, clearing a major hurdle to exiting bankruptcy. (The plan needs a judge’s approval, but a signoff from the governor makes that more likely.) [The New York Times]

Firefighters are finding themselves squeezed from both sides amid the pandemic, which could make wildfire season much more difficult. [The New York Times]

And Hayward is set to open a coronavirus testing center that will prioritize emergency workers. [KQED]

As requested, the U.S. Navy is set to send a 1,000-bed hospital ship to the Port of Los Angeles this week. It’s based in San Diego. [City News Service and NBC 7]

Want to understand how the coronavirus spread across the world? Here’s a graphic explainer. [The New York Times]

“Through this whole ordeal, we didn’t want her to get lost in the story.” Thousands of people have been dying from the coronavirus. They’ve been laid to rest without big gatherings. But the family of Loretta Mendoza Dionisio, outgoing and unstoppable, wanted her to be remembered as more than a statistic. [The New York Times]

[Read the latest updates on the coronavirus pandemic here.]

I don’t know about you, but last week felt like a lifetime to me. And this week seems unlikely to be any less strange and anxiety-ridden.

We’ll have some more pet photos soon, but first, here are some tips for staying sane. They include setting small, achievable goals, finding joy and turning your panic into service. (Here’s a list of organizations to get you started, if you’re in a position to donate.)

And on the bright side, you can go to the hottest parties happening anywhere, and you can stay in your sweats; they’re all happening online.

California Today goes live at 6:30 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com. Were you forwarded this email? Sign up for California Today here and read every edition online here.

Jill Cowan grew up in Orange County, graduated from U.C. Berkeley and has reported all over the state, including the Bay Area, Bakersfield and Los Angeles — but she always wants to see more. Follow along here or on Twitter, @jillcowan.

California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and graduated from U.C. Berkeley.

<|endoftext|>

The idea took root after Jenni Spinner and her wife, Rebecca Kell, watched videos of Europeans, homebound because of the coronavirus, get on their balconies and sing to raise their spirits in the face of crisis.

Wouldn’t it be neat, they mused, if they could get the residents of their Chicago apartment building to do something similar?

Ms. Spinner said she figured a handful of friends might be game for a karaoke-style communal singalong to “Livin’ on a Prayer” by Bon Jovi, which they said was easy to sing and well known. Thus, a Facebook event page for a “Chicago-Wide Window Sing-a-Long” on March 21 was born.

Three days before it was set to take place, 100 people responded that they either planned to participate or were interested in doing so. By the night of the event, that number had swelled to 19,000.

“It kind of blew up,” Ms. Spinner said on Monday. She said she and Ms. Kell were planning another singalong for Saturday; this time the tune will be “ABC” by the Jackson 5. She said they would probably continue the singalongs every Saturday until the crisis has lifted.

The impromptu musical performances springing up in some of America’s largest cities appear to have started in Italy, which has been ravaged by the outbreak.

Italians sang their national anthem from windows and balconies. Some played the violin and others clanged pots and pans. In Florence, the opera singer Maurizio Marchini serenaded the city from his balcony.

Much the same way that Italians joined in song to show their solidarity, Chicago and Dallas residents under stay-at-home orders sang from their apartment windows and balconies.

In downtown Dallas on Friday, residents joined in a rendition of the Bill Withers classic “Lean on Me.” In New York City, a video showed apartment tenants singing tunes like “Yellow Submarine” and “My Girl.”

In other cities, residents have taken out musical instruments to play, while others have joined “virtual parties” on Instagram hosted by a notable DJ and “attended” by headliners like Drake, Naomi Campbell and Sean Combs.

Raising your voice in song with others can be an intimate shared social experience — and the song choice matters little, said Steve Waksman, a professor of music at Smith College in Northampton, Mass., about 100 miles west of Boston.

“Why do we sing at sporting events? Why do we sing in churches?” he said on Monday. “There is something distinctly communal about singing in harmony. It’s like touching someone without touching them.”

Staying away from others is the prime directive of health officials who are imposing more restrictions to help curb the pandemic.

But what better way to connect with others — from a distance — than through song?

Colin Boyle, a photojournalist, covered the Chicago singalong for Block Club Chicago. He stood in the courtyard of the U-shaped apartment building of about 50 units where Ms. Spinner and Ms. Kell live.

“As it gets close to 7 p.m., people started singing and other people started looking out their windows, ‘What’s going on? What’s this singing?’” he said.

A Chicago classic-rock radio station also played the song at the appointed hour.

Ms. Spinner said she and Ms. Kell were singing loudly, so she could not be sure how many others participated, but she was struck by how it brought tenants together.

She described looking out the window: “There are people you rarely talk to hanging out their window and you go, ‘Hey, there you are.’”

For his part, Jon Bon Jovi expressed his support in an Instagram post.

“In these trying times I am with you with all of my heart and my soul, sending my love to everybody in Chicago and across America,” he said in the post. “Sing it out, baby. We’re all going to come through this together. Be strong.”

<|endoftext|>

Texas and Ohio have included abortions among the nonessential surgeries and medical procedures that they are requiring to be delayed, setting off a new front in the fight over abortion rights in the middle of the coronavirus pandemic in the United States.

Both states said they were trying to preserve extremely precious protective equipment for health care workers and to make space for a potential flood of coronavirus patients.

But abortion rights activists said that abortions should be counted as essential and that people could not wait for the procedure until the pandemic was over.

On Monday, Ken Paxton, the attorney general of Texas, clarified that the postponement of surgeries and medical procedures announced by Gov. Greg Abbott over the weekend included “any type of abortion that is not medically necessary to preserve the life or health of the mother.”

Failure to do so, he said, could result in penalties of up to $1,000 or 180 days of jail time. It was not immediately clear if that included medication abortion, which involves providers administering pills in the earlier stages of pregnancy.

The move followed a similar action by health authorities in Ohio last week and has prompted a legal scramble by abortion rights groups to preserve access. Activists accused state leaders of using the coronavirus crisis to advance a political agenda to restrict abortions. They pointed out that the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, a respected society of medical professionals, recommended last week that abortion not be included in the list of medical procedures that could potentially be postponed.

“Instead of trying to distract with ideology, state lawmakers should focus on prioritizing public health and safety measures,” said Tara Pohlmeyer, communications manager at Progress Texas, a group that supports abortion rights.

The states, for their part, said they were trying to protect public health and preserve critical medical equipment at a time when the country’s health infrastructure is in danger of being overwhelmed. Mr. Paxton said in his statement that routine dermatologic, ophthalmological and dental procedures, as well as orthopedic surgeries, were also included.

“The bottom line is, these abortions must be delayed,” said Joe Pojman, executive director of Texas Alliance for Life, one of the state’s main anti-abortion groups. He said Texas was not “singling out any particular procedure or any segment of the health care industry.”

The announcement in Texas on Monday sent abortion rights advocates and their lawyers racing to determine how likely it was that clinics would need to stop abortion services.

“We are still waiting for various legal teams and local providers to work through what it means,” said the Very Rev. Katherine Hancock Ragsdale, president of the National Abortion Federation.

Texas has a history of being on the vanguard of reducing abortion access. The last major Supreme Court decision on abortion, in 2016, involved a restrictive law in Texas. But it was still not clear on Monday night whether the state’s abortion clinics would stop providing services. Some seemed determined to continue.

“Patients cannot wait until this pandemic is over to receive safe abortion care,” Amy Hagstrom Miller, president of Whole Woman’s Health, the abortion clinic at the center of the Supreme Court decision, said in a statement.

In Ohio, where anti-abortion activists have gained influence in recent years, health authorities issued an order to postpone all nonessential surgeries beginning at 5 p.m. Wednesday. On Friday and Saturday, the office of the state’s attorney general sent warning letters to abortion clinics in Dayton, Cincinnati and Cleveland, telling them to “immediately stop performing nonessential and elective surgical abortions.”

A spokeswoman for the attorney general’s office, Bethany McCorkle, said the letters were based on complaints that had come to Ohio’s Department of Health. At least one came from Ohio Right to Life, an anti-abortion advocacy group, said its president, Michael Gonidakis.

In an email blast to supporters on Saturday, Mr. Gonidakis said he had sent a letter to Planned Parenthood of Greater Ohio, warning its president, Iris E. Harvey, that “by performing surgical abortions, your company is putting the health and safety of all Ohioans in danger.”

For now, though, the state’s abortion clinics remain open. Lawyers for several of them argued to the state’s attorney general, Dave Yost, that abortions were in fact essential surgical procedures and that the clinics had no intention of stopping.

“Our doors remain open,” Chrisse France, president of Preterm, an abortion clinic in Cleveland, said on Monday. Ms. Harvey and Kersha Deibel, president of Planned Parenthood Southwest Ohio Region, said the same.

Louisiana was another state to issue an order over the weekend saying that nonessential medical procedures would be delayed. An anti-abortion group, Louisiana Right to Life, put out a statement on Monday saying that Hope Medical Group, one of the last remaining abortion providers in the state, was closed. But Nancy Northup, president of the Center for Reproductive Rights, which represents the clinic, denied that.

“Our client Hope Medical Group is still open,” Ms. Northup said in a statement.

Manny Fernandez contributed reporting from Texas.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — An estimated 13,500 Americans abroad have asked the State Department for help returning to the United States as the coronavirus pandemic has resulted in closed borders and suspended commercial flights, two senior officials said Monday.

About 5,700 additional U.S. citizens and legal residents have already been brought back on flights organized by the State Department, the officials said.

From Peru to Morocco to Japan, stranded Americans have pleaded for help getting home as the pandemic has spread. Over the next five days, the State Department will charter 16 flights around the world to bring home another 1,600 people, said one of the officials, who spoke to reporters on condition of anonymity because of department protocols on briefing the news media.

About 10 million American citizens live abroad, officials said. But the officials urged Americans who have homes overseas to consider hunkering down, underscoring that the travel assistance was designed for tourists and temporary expatriates, like students.

Those Americans should try to return to the United States before all commercial flights are shut down, the official said. There was still room on some of the flights this week for additional passengers, said the official, who urged Americans to register at the department’s travel enrollment system for information.

But scores of traveling Americans, including a group of medical students stranded in Peru, said they had yet to receive any help from the United States government.

Still others said the State Department planned to cancel the passports of travelers if they did not pay for their tickets home — even though they had not been told how much the chartered airfare would cost.

“Repatriation flights are not free,” read a notice that American citizens in Ghana said they received from the U.S. Embassy in Accra. “Your U.S. passport will be canceled pending loan repayment arrangements. You will not be permitted to renew your passport until you’ve arranged a repayment plan with the Department of State.”

Tiffany Dillard, who has been in Ghana for a brief visit while traveling abroad as an English teacher, has struggled to leave since the United States advised Americans last week to come home or stay put.

She said she was apprehensive that her passport could be canceled. “That just makes me nervous anytime someone messes with my passport any way,” Ms. Dillard, a Milwaukee native, said in an interview on Monday. She said she was also considering staying in Ghana.

A spokeswoman at the State Department in Washington did not have an immediate comment when asked about the notice to cancel stranded Americans’ passports.

Senator Robert Menendez of New Jersey, the top Democrat on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, urged President Trump on Monday to “provide Americans overseas the support that they need” during what he called an “unprecedented pandemic.”

“No American should ever have to worry that they might be abandoned abroad by our government,” Mr. Menendez wrote in a letter to Mr. Trump.

The senior State Department officials said that in some cases, foreign governments had imposed restrictions to contain the virus that prevented American flights from departing.

One of the officials said that had been the case in Peru, where 15 students from Alabama, Georgia and North Carolina who were training to be paramedics and physician assistants were trying to leave.

The official said fewer flights were able to fly in and out of Peru because the international airport in Lima, the capital, had been shut down for the duration of the country’s quarantine. That means flights have had to fly through military airports, which do not have the capacity to manage all the additional air traffic.

More than 100 Americans who were stranded aboard the Silver Shadow cruise liner in Recife, Brazil, for more than a week returned to the United States early Monday, landing in Dallas. The Americans were the last group of 315 passengers from 18 countries to fly home from the stricken ship.

Earlier in the month, the passengers had been restricted to their rooms after a Canadian passenger fell ill and tested positive for the coronavirus. Beginning a few days ago, most of the countries with citizens aboard the Silver Shadow chartered aircraft and flew them home.

In addition to the State Department’s chartered flights, the Pentagon and the Department of Homeland Security are also flying Americans back to the United States on government aircraft, the official said.

On Sunday, Global Guardian, an international security firm, evacuated 144 Americans who were stranded in Honduras. The company arranged for a plane to fly to the island of Roatán after getting permission from the Honduran government.

“I cannot begin to express my gratitude to the entire Global Guardian team for getting my husband and I home safely to our families and lives here in Boston,” Annie Perlick, a nurse at Boston Children’s Hospital, said in a statement.

The United States military said last week it had evacuated 89 Americans out of Honduras.

Lara Jakes reported from Washington and Ashley Southall from New York. Eric Schmitt and Adam Goldman contributed reporting from Washington.

<|endoftext|>

Erasing anxiety from daily life isn’t an option for most people today. But therapists, clergy and meditation specialists say there are simple and accessible ways to overcome debilitating panic.

Coping skills, said Rick Hanson, a psychologist and a senior fellow of the Greater Good Science Center at the University of California, Berkeley, “help you reframe the situation you’re facing. It’s not a matter of looking at the world through rose-colored glasses, it’s about creating resilience.”

Here are tips from professionals.

For people who may be feeling down or afraid, psychologists Julia Hitch and Andrew Fleming recommend a three-prong, daily approach for coping. The first, “mastery,” requires setting a reachable goal for the day, whether it’s practicing the piano for 20 minutes, trying a new recipe or exercising. A second daily essential is finding an element of pleasure: eating a delicious snack or taking a bath, for instance. Then comes “connection,” which in the age of Covid-19 means calling or video chatting with a friend or relative to take ourselves outside of isolation and into a circle of fellowship.

When he feels anxiety seep in, Dr. Hanson, who creates guided meditations for the digital platform Simple Habit, said he takes a few slow, deep breaths and reminds himself of what is true in this exact moment. Then he takes stock, telling himself, “In this moment, your heart is beating. You’re breathing in this moment. No saber-tooth tiger is coming after you in this moment.”

“Our fear is about the future. It’s what we anticipate,” he said. “But if you stop and say, ‘I am healthy in this moment,’ it pulls you out of rumination and anxious, helpless preoccupation. Your brain will come to this moment of quiet realization. ‘Things are not great, but they’re basically OK. I am still surviving.’ It gives you more of a sense of agency.”

It’s important to find a line between educating yourself with information that helps guide your decisions and inundating yourself with information that simply increases anxiety. “Turn off your notifications,” said Dr. Amy Cirbus, the director of clinical content for Talkspace, the online therapy platform, and check in at specific times a day with news platforms or cable TV.

“It’s really hard to discern whether a news report is something you need to know to take action” or if it merely is providing more fodder to ruminate over, she said. “If you’re just coming into the news bubble a few times a day and not getting inundated, then you are choosing the moments and this gives you back some power.” Urgent news will almost certainly find its way to you, she added.

“Every hand that we don’t shake must become a phone call that we place. Every embrace that we avoid must become a verbal expression of warmth and concern,” Rabbi Yosef Kanefsky told his congregants last week.

Feelings of helplessness come from the loss of power we have over the current situation, he explained in an interview. But we do have the power to provide support to others. “Write down people’s names, thinking of those most likely to be in need because of their age or medical situation or if they live alone. We ourselves are much less likely to feel panicked if we channel our anxiety into, ‘Who can I help right now and how can I help them?’”

<|endoftext|>

The coronavirus has wreaked havoc on statehouses across the United States, derailing policy agendas, forcing legislators to set aside plans for spending on education, road construction and opioid addiction, and draining state coffers with startling speed.

Already, the fiscal damage from the virus is acute, legislative leaders in a dozen states say. Vast numbers of businesses have been forced to close their doors and millions of Americans face unemployment, creating a sudden need to spend on virus-related assistance, the certainty of sharp drops in tax collections and a turning of once optimistic budget projections upside down.

The outbreak has forced at least 22 state legislatures to close or postpone sessions at the busiest time of the year, when lawmakers typically pass legislation and negotiate budgets. But the toll on state policies and spending appears likely to extend far beyond a single legislative season.

“I could not possibly overstate how disruptive this virus is,” said State Senator Matt Lesser, a Democrat of Connecticut. “It has totally upended politics as we know it.”

The crisis has brought state policymaking to a standstill regardless of partisan control. Any legislative proposal with a price tag appears endangered.

In Idaho, Republicans shelved plans for broad property tax relief, saying they lacked time with the virus looming. In Missouri, also held by Republicans, the clock could run out on efforts to pass a bill to create a statewide database for doctors and pharmacists to track opioid purchases, leaving at least one Missouri Republican wondering aloud about additional opioid overdose deaths that may not be prevented now.

In Connecticut, controlled by Democrats, a long, fierce battle to create a public health option for those who cannot afford private insurance appears likely to fail, after lawmakers adjourned until at least March 30. 

In Minnesota, the only state in the nation where the legislature is split between the political parties, Democrats had an eye on paid family and medical leave; Republicans hoped to exempt social security income from state income tax. Now everyone is recalculating.

“With coronavirus, it looks like that all has evaporated,” Paul E. Gazelka, the Republican majority leader in the Minnesota Senate, said of tax-cutting plans.

And in state after state, lawmakers say they suddenly have little money to address anything but the unfolding medical and economic crises. In some places, the annual budget-writing process, which depends on projected tax collections, has been sent into chaos.

Missouri legislators, anticipating a drop in revenue, put off voting on a new budget for the fiscal year that starts this summer until they know more. “Our priorities will just have drastically changed by the time we write the budget,” said Elijah Haahr, the Republican Speaker of the House.

In Colorado, analysts are forecasting that the state will bring in $750 million less than expected in the coming fiscal year.

“Pick a day and we are losing more money than we were the day before,” said State Senator Liz Krueger, a Democrat and the chair of New York’s finance committee. “The federal government can print money in its basement. We don’t have that luxury.” In New York City, the comptroller has said that the virus was likely to create a $5 billion to $6 billion hole in the city’s budget over the next 15 months, one sign that cities, like states, expect significant fiscal turmoil.

The coronavirus has hit with particular force in densely populated coastal states — New York, Washington and California — where leaders have ordered stores, gyms, movie theaters, amusement parks and restaurants and bars to close. California expects to lose 280,000 jobs by the beginning of next year, which will have a cascading effect on state revenues.

But smaller, rural states are closing businesses, too, and bracing for a hit. In Vermont, Mitzi Johnson, the Assembly Speaker and a Democrat, said tax revenues “have come to a screaming halt.” Before the coronavirus crisis, the Vermont House had passed new measures, one that would expand access to contraception and another that would legalize the recreational sale of marijuana. More ambitious plans for education funding, though, have been shelved for a distant, more prosperous day.

The virus is threatening citizen-driven policy initiatives in the states as well. Twenty-six states allow residents to write referendums that carry the force of law, and this has become a popular way of forcing change.

In Missouri and Oklahoma, campaigns have been underway to force state Medicaid expansions, and in Ohio, residents were pushing to raise the minimum wage in a referendum that requires collecting more than 442,000 signatures by July 1.

But the virus has complicated the task of organizing and collecting signatures.

“The very act of going to your neighbor and asking them to sign violates all the rules of social distancing,” said John Schleifer, executive director of the Fairness Project, a liberal nonprofit group that supports the minimum wage increase. “Unless you’ve got a six-foot-long pen, that does not work.”

Not every state’s policymaking has been slowed by the virus, and on Monday, Dan Patrick, the Texas lieutenant governor, urged the country to get back to work, raising the prospect that the effect on policies and budgets may differ by state.

In Kentucky, Republican legislators have pressed forward with an agenda that includes setting new restrictions on abortion, banning police and public agencies from creating sanctuary policies for undocumented immigrants and tightening voter identification requirements.

Republican leaders there forged ahead with their sessions, though Democrats have criticized them for carrying out their plans in the absence of the public, which has been barred from the Capitol over concerns about the virus.

State Senator Damon Thayer, the Republican floor leader, dismissed criticisms that lawmakers were operating without public input as “left-wing talking points.” He said his party would agree to leave only if Gov. Andy Beshear, a Democrat, assured lawmakers of an open-ended special session later.

“People want to use the virus to shut us down and kill bills they don’t like,” Mr. Thayer said.

And in Idaho, though a broad tax relief plan was delayed, state lawmakers moved forward with an array of legislation, including bans on gender changes on birth certificates and on transgender girls competing in high school sports.

“It’s a campaign year,” said Scott Bedke, the Republican Speaker of the House, “and this is just business as usual in a Republican-dominated state.”

The Legislature’s stance so irritated The Idaho Statesman, the state’s largest newspaper, that an editorial advised the lawmakers: “Coronavirus Can Kill You. Just Go Home Already.” The lawmakers adjourned not long ago.

In recent years, with federal leaders and parties clashing in Washington, D.C., states have often been the crucibles for policy innovation. As the virus sweeps through the nation, some of those policies may serve as a shield for Americans struggling to recover.

Eight states — Alaska, California, Hawaii, Minnesota, Montana, Nevada, Oregon and Washington — have passed higher minimum wages for restaurant servers. As the virus has forced restaurants across the nation to shutter and lay off thousands of servers and staff members, these laws will mean larger unemployment checks for the jobless.

Similarly, over the years, 26 states have adopted a policy known as short-term compensation, which allows employers to reduce workers’ hours rather than resort to layoffs.

“There have been years now of strong state creativity and that won’t get totally swept away in this crisis,” said Mark Muro of the Brookings Institution’s metropolitan policy program. He saw reason to hope that more such innovation — needed now more than ever — may lay ahead. “If we’re lucky and we get the right kind of federal stimulus bill, some of this innovation,” he said, “will likely not just survive but be accelerated.”

For now, many state houses reflect the nation’s ideological divisions and preoccupations, and the virus has not changed that. “It’s sort of like the lens you look through before coronavirus is the same lens you look through to solve issues related to coronavirus,” said Mr. Gazelka, the Republican state senator in Minnesota.

Republicans favor easing mandates and pushing back tax deadlines, he said. And Democrats, according to Melissa Hortman, the Democratic House Speaker, want to find ways to provide more direct aid to working-class residents.

“They look wise now in this pandemic,” she said of her party’s policies.

In some cases, though, liberal and conservative agendas appear to have begun to yield to survival.

In New York, a massive surge in coronavirus cases threatens to swamp hospitals, and legislators are trying to scrape together money to keep families out of foreclosure and eviction and to fund sick leave.

“I have to say that on the ground, in real life, people are panicked,” said Ms. Krueger, the State Senate finance chair. “There’s just endless questions that we in government do not have the answers to yet.”

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — Invoking the coronavirus crisis, the Justice Department has asked Congress to let more federal inmates serve their time at home and to steer scarce masks and testing kits to federal prisons ahead of other agencies, according to draft legislation submitted last week to congressional leaders.

The department has also asked Congress to relax speedy trial rules and expand opportunities for law enforcement officials to use video conferencing for certain preliminary federal criminal and detention proceedings, like arraignments for newly arrested people.

“Authorizing the general use of teleconferencing for these preliminary proceedings would ensure that defendants are able to access courts shortly after their arrest,” the Justice Department wrote. “It also would limit any disruptions caused by the coronavirus.”

Those proposals are among a handful that the Trump administration has told congressional leaders that it is making a priority — and that lawmakers of both parties are considering enacting — after both Republicans and Democrats reacted skeptically to more sweeping ideas in the proposal, according to congressional aides.

Those ideas that appear to be dead on arrival included a plan to empower President Trump or his successors to eliminate legal protections for asylum seekers. That would amount to a permanent change to immigration law that would require no finding of any connection to a public health risk.

It is not clear what Congress will do with the proposals, several of which Politico first reported. As the Senate fights over a nearly $2 trillion stimulus package, some of the Justice Department’s ideas could end up attached to it, one congressional aide said, while another said that none of the proposals were likely to be part of the current round of legislation.

But the pandemic is growing worse, and history has shown that Congress can sometimes rush to enact sudden and major expansions of government power during a crisis as lawmakers feel pressure to show they are responding, as when it abruptly passed the USA Patriot Act after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.

Another part of the Justice Department’s proposal calls for empowering Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. to pause the statute of limitations during a national emergency, and similarly permitting chief judges of district courts to suspend deadlines for “pre-arrest, post-arrest, pretrial, trial and post-trial procedures in criminal and juvenile proceedings and all civil process and proceedings.”

But lawmakers of both parties greeted with skepticism the notion of extended detentions without judicial process even if the court system was disrupted, according to congressional aides briefed on the negotiations.

Still, one aide said, lawmakers are considering easing some of the requirements of the Speedy Trial Act — which generally lets defendants demand a trial within 70 days of arraignment — if the coronavirus pandemic makes it impossible to hold in-person trials for a while, including by sequestering 12 jurors in the same room for deliberations.

Lawmakers are also said to be open to another part of the Justice Department proposal for the Bureau of Prisons. It would give the bureau the power to expand the use of home confinement — now capped at 10 percent of an inmate’s term or six months — and prioritize steering masks and testing kits to federal prisons.

Federal prisons officials are confronting the nationwide shortage of masks and other personal protective equipment for medical personnel, the department wrote, labeling the shortfall a “vulnerability” as it seeks preferential status.

“B.O.P. is currently competing and engaging the same landscape of vendors as all other federal agencies and private entities,” the proposal said.

The Justice Department’s spokeswoman, Kerri Kupec, said on Twitter on Sunday in response to the Politico report that the proposal was prompted by a congressional request for suggestions and that department officials were seeking to empower judges, not the executive branch.

“Bottom line: The proposed legislative text confers powers upon judges,” she wrote. “It does not confer new powers upon the executive branch. These provisions are designed to empower the courts to ensure the fair and effective administration of justice.”

However, two congressional aides said they were unaware of any request from Congress going to the Justice Department, and understood that the department itself had decided on its own to ask all of its components for ideas and sent them over.

Justice Department representatives did not respond to follow-up questions about who asked the department to come up with ideas for new laws because of the pandemic, nor about the justifications for the request to confer new powers on the executive branch over asylum matters, which her statement did not address.

Under that part of the draft legislation — said to be quickly dismissed by lawmakers — presidents could exempt immigrants from eligibility to apply for asylum and from a domestic legal rule forbidding the federal government from sending them home to countries where they are likely to face persecution, which is also a requirement of international law.

The proposal would eliminate those legal protections not only for migrants found to be infected with the coronavirus or other communicable diseases of “public health significance,” but also to any others who are separately “subject to a presidential proclamation suspending and limiting the entry of aliens into the United States.”

The Trump administration has been trying to curb asylum claims at the southwestern border for the past three years, and last week it developed plans to use the pandemic to shut down that process under the president’s existing authority — a move that is certain to face legal challenge.

The proposal to expand Mr. Trump’s powers over asylum law would be a “really dangerous weapon” to put in his hands, placing at greater risk people who come to the United States seeking protection, said Omar Jadwat, the director of the American Civil Liberties Union’s Immigrants’ Rights Project.

“I am glad people are on the ball enough to see the danger here,” he said.

<|endoftext|>

HOLLYWOOD, Fla. — They were both yelling.

She banged the gavel and walked off.

He pointed his fingers and clapped in frustration.

The showdown last week between the mayor of Lake Worth Beach, Fla., and a city commissioner, captured in an explosive two-minute-and-17-second video clip that resulted in death threats by viewers, provides a glimpse into the high-stakes tension facing local government officials across the country amid the coronavirus outbreak. Debates over shutdowns and containment measures and their economic impact are boiling over as stakes rise.

The city commissioner, Omari Hardy, had watched the news as the coronavirus transformed from a distant outbreak to a threat to local lives.

Mr. Hardy thought the city of about 38,000, which stretches seven square miles not far from President Trump’s Mar-a-Lago resort, needed to act quickly to blunt the spread of the coronavirus and to protect the city’s most vulnerable.

He wanted officials to immediately ban large public gatherings, stop shutting off delinquent electric and water accounts, establish more protections for city workers, and find out who had lawful emergency powers.

Mr. Hardy said that he had tried to arrange a special commission meeting for a week as cases in Florida multiplied, but that at every turn, his requests were dismissed by the city manager, Michael Bornstein, who at one point told him to “calm down.”

So by the time the five-member commission met on Thursday, Mr. Hardy was seething. And it would not be long before everybody knew it.

At the end of a fraught two-hour meeting, Mr. Hardy unleashed his exasperation on Mayor Pam Triolo and Mr. Bornstein in a fiery speech that would be alternatively characterized on social media as heroic and disrespectful after it was posted online last week by The Palm Beach Post.

“I was angry. I wish that I hadn’t lost my cool,” said Mr. Hardy, 30, a former middle school civics teacher elected to the commission three years ago. “I felt strongly that I needed to say the things I said, and the public needed to know how wrong this is. But I wish I hadn’t been yelling.”

Mr. Hardy, who describes himself as a progressive Democrat, insisted that the city was on its way to creating its own crisis by taking away utilities from some of the poorest residents because they could not pay their bills.

“This is a banana republic is what you’re turning this place into with your so-called leadership,” Mr. Hardy shouted at Ms. Triolo in the meeting, his voice booming. “We should have been talking about this last week. We cut off people’s utilities this week and made them pay what could have been their last check — to us — to turn their lights on in a global health pandemic. But you don’t care about that. You didn’t want to meet.”

Ms. Triolo did not sit idly by. She repeatedly slammed the gavel to recess the meeting and quiet Mr. Hardy. And she yelled right back at him.

“Point of order! You are done. You’re done. You’re done. Disrespectful,” she said, marching out of the meeting and into a back room of City Hall. But social distance did nothing to slow the argument; it continued from two separate rooms as other commissioners sat quietly.

Ms. Triolo, 52, a moderate Republican in her fourth term as mayor, suggested that Mr. Hardy’s rant was intentional grandstanding for attention — he is running for a seat in the State House. She said that his actions amounted to bullying and that the issue of utility shut-offs had been inaccurately portrayed.

“He hijacked this meeting to talk about something that was not even on the budget,” she said. “He was aggressive and completely out of order. That snippet was taken out of context. It was damaging and gave our city a black eye.”

Mr. Bornstein acknowledged that service to dozens of residents had been suspended earlier, but he said no utility disconnections had taken place since a moratorium was announced on Wednesday, the day before the explosive meeting. Those customers had already had their service restored, he said, and fines had been reversed.

The city later announced additional protections for city workers, including paid leave, and closed the public golf course, but it left the beach — which attracts about 3,000 visitors daily — open until the governor, Ron DeSantis, ordered beaches closed in Broward and Palm Beach Counties.

Mr. Hardy said he could hardly sleep after the commission meeting. He knew the shouting match had been videotaped. He did not know how it would land among residents — or that it would eventually be viewed more than four million times.

“I wondered what people would think of me, this black man yelling at this older white woman, which is why I didn’t chase her out of the room to finish my point,” he said, adding that most responses he has received have been positive. “I didn’t want people to think I was this wild and crazy black man who should be nowhere near a seat of power,” he added.

Ms. Triolo had her own worries. Since the meeting, she said, she has received so many death threats that she is requesting police protection. Many of the threats specified that they wanted her to die from the coronavirus, she said.

“I have been threatened. My family has been threatened,” she said. “People have told me all kinds of terrible, horrible ways they hope I die. This has been unsettling.”

When Ms. Triolo told Mr. Hardy about the threats, he condemned them on social media.

“This was two public officials talking about issues pertaining to our city,” Mr. Hardy said. “These threats must stop. She has a right to feel safe.”

<|endoftext|>

President Trump has praised Dr. Anthony S. Fauci as a “major television star.” He has tried to demonstrate that the administration is giving him free rein to speak. And he has deferred to Dr. Fauci’s opinion several times at the coronavirus task force’s televised briefings.

But Dr. Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases since 1984, has grown bolder in correcting the president’s falsehoods and overly rosy statements about the spread of the coronavirus in the past two weeks — and he has become a hero to the president’s critics because of it. And now, Mr. Trump’s patience has started to wear thin.

So has the patience of some White House advisers, who see Dr. Fauci as taking shots at the president in some of his interviews with print reporters while offering extensive praise for Mr. Trump in television interviews with conservative hosts.

Mr. Trump knows that Dr. Fauci, who has advised every president since Ronald Reagan, is seen as credible with a large section of the public and with journalists, and so he has given the doctor more leeway to contradict him than he has other officials, according to multiple advisers to the president.

When Mr. Trump knows that he has more to gain than to lose by keeping an adviser, he has resisted impulses to fight back against apparent criticism, sometimes for monthslong interludes. One example was when he wanted to fire the White House counsel, Donald F. McGahn II, in 2017 and early 2018. Another was Jeff Sessions, the former attorney general. Mr. Trump eventually announced both were leaving when he felt the danger in doing so had passed (Mr. McGahn has told people he left on his own).

So far, the president appears to be making the same calculation with Dr. Fauci, who was not on the briefing room podium on Monday evening. When asked why, Mr. Trump said he had just been with Dr. Fauci for “a long time” at a task force meeting. Officials, asked about the doctor’s absence, repeated that they were rotating officials who appear at the briefings.

“He’s a good man,” Mr. Trump said. Dr. Fauci was scheduled to be on Fox News with Sean Hannity a short time later.

Still, the president has resisted portraying the virus as the kind of threat described by Dr. Fauci and other public health experts. In his effort to create a positive vision of a future where the virus is less of a danger, critics have accused Mr. Trump of giving false hope.

Dr. Fauci and the president have publicly disagreed on how long it will take for a coronavirus vaccine to become available and whether an anti-malaria drug, chloroquine, could help those with an acute form of the virus. Dr. Fauci has made clear that he does not think the drug necessarily holds the potential that Mr. Trump says it does.

In an interview with Science Magazine, Dr. Fauci responded to a question about how he had managed to not get fired by saying that, to Mr. Trump’s “credit, even though we disagree on some things, he listens. He goes his own way. He has his own style. But on substantive issues, he does listen to what I say.”

But Dr. Fauci also said there was a limit to what he could do when Mr. Trump made false statements, as he often does during the briefings.

“I can’t jump in front of the microphone and push him down,” Dr. Fauci said. “OK, he said it. Let’s try and get it corrected for the next time.”

In an interview with CBS’s “Face the Nation” on Sunday, Dr. Fauci played down the idea that there was a divide between him and the president. “There isn’t fundamentally a difference there,” he said.

“The president has heard, as we all have heard, what are what I call anecdotal reports that certain drugs work. So what he was trying to do and express was the hope that if they might work, let’s try and push their usage,” Dr. Fauci said. “I, on the other side, have said I’m not disagreeing with the fact anecdotally they might work, but my job is to prove definitively from a scientific standpoint that they do work. So I was taking a purely medical, scientific standpoint, and the president was trying to bring hope to the people.”

A White House spokesman and Dr. Fauci did not respond to requests for comment.

Dr. Fauci came to his current role as the AIDS epidemic was exploding and President Reagan was paying it little attention. He and C. Everett Koop, the surgeon general, were widely credited with spurring the Reagan administration to action against AIDS, a fact that underscores Dr. Fauci’s ability to negotiate difficult politics.

He has recognized Mr. Trump’s need for praise; in the president’s presence and with audiences that are friendly to him, Dr. Fauci has been complimentary. He told the radio host Mark Levin on Fox News of the administration’s response to the virus: “I can’t imagine that under any circumstances that anybody could be doing more.”

And Dr. Fauci is savvy not just about the inner workings of the government but about the news media that covers it.

When Vice President Mike Pence took over as the lead of the coronavirus task force, his advisers wanted to put a 24-hour pause on interviews that administration officials were giving as they assessed where the administration was after a chaotic few weeks. They were initially fine with Dr. Fauci’s appearances, meeting with him before interviews to get a sense of what he planned to say.

But in the past two weeks, as Dr. Fauci’s interviews have increased in frequency, White House officials have become more concerned that he is criticizing the president.

Officials asked him about the viral moment in the White House briefing room, when he put his hand to his face and appeared to suppress a chuckle after Mr. Trump referred to the State Department as the “Deep State Department.” Dr. Fauci had a benign explanation: He had a scratchy throat and a lozenge he had in his mouth had gotten stuck in his throat, which he tried to mask from reporters.

Some officials have not questioned that Dr. Fauci is giving interviews, but they have wondered how he has so much time for so many requests from the news media.

Dr. Fauci, for his part, has been dismissive of some questions about whether he was at odds with the president, treating it as a news media obsession.

“I think there’s this issue of trying to separate the two of us,” he said on CBS.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — Federal emergency response teams toured a convention center in New York City on Monday, a sign that a much-needed temporary hospital is on the way. California has received hundreds of thousands of masks for those on the front lines of the outbreak. And President Trump said desperately needed protective equipment was on its way to Washington State.

In spots around the nation, the gears of the federal government’s response to the coronavirus outbreak have begun turning. But as the Federal Emergency Management Agency grapples with a crisis whose breadth poses challenges it has never confronted before, state and local leaders lament the time already lost and say the delivery of essential supplies remains far too slow to address their quickly expanding list of needs.

“There has been a little bit of progress. But not fast enough,” Gov. Larry Hogan of Maryland, a Republican who is the chairman of the National Governors Association, said on Monday, an echo of the mix of appreciation and frustration being expressed by governors and city leaders nationwide.

Most pressing: urgent shortages of protective equipment in particular, like gloves and masks.

“We need them for correctional officers. We need them for health care workers. We need them for police officers,” Mr. Hogan said. “We need them for all front-line people. All the people who are doing the testing.”

Late last week, Mr. Trump put FEMA in charge of the federal government’s response to the outbreak as states ramped up calls for additional assistance. The agency is charged with finding and issuing resources for states among federal agencies and the private sector.

Mr. Trump said on Monday that FEMA was in the process of distributing more than eight million N95 masks and 13 million surgical masks to states. The administration is also sending 73 pallets of equipment to New York City and an additional 36 pallets to Washington State. It was unclear when the states would receive such materials, and the numbers are only a tiny share of what is needed.

Mr. Trump, who has counted on companies to donate materials as opposed to mandating production under the Defense Production Act, a Korean War-era law, also said more than six million masks had been donated to FEMA in the past 96 hours.

“We’re having millions and millions of masks made as we speak,” said Mr. Trump, adding, “Everybody’s working together.”

The administration also issued an executive order on Monday evening to delegate authority to health officials to prevent hoarding of protective gear — a move that may help to head off recent criticisms of the White House for not using the full force of its powers to channel goods where they are needed most. Peter Navarro, the White House trade adviser, has said that the Defense Production Act is not currently necessary, but that it might be invoked in the future to crack down on hoarders. Critics have said invoking it now could speed production of lifesaving supplies and equipment.

Among those critics was Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York, who again questioned on Monday why the federal government had not moved more aggressively. Still, Mr. Cuomo tempered his criticism with praise for the pace of the Trump administration’s response to a request he submitted Sunday for additional hospital capacity in New York, which the federal government agreed later that same day to help provide.

“President Trump did deliver yesterday,” said Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat. “That is government working. That is the government working quickly. And I thanked him for it. It makes a big difference to New York.”

Gov. J.B. Pritzker of Illinois, a Democrat, took to Twitter on Monday to vent his frustration with the slow federal response, publishing a chart of all the medical supplies that the state had requested from the federal government and how much it had received, with almost none of its requests fulfilled so far.

For example, the state wants 2.34 million N95 masks, but has gotten only 246,000, the governor said.

“We need the federal government to use the Defense Production Act to help the states get what we need,” Mr. Pritzker wrote in a follow-up tweet. “It’s the federal government’s job to make sure that a nurse being properly equipped in Illinois doesn’t come at the cost of a doctor being ready for work in California.”

Rear Adm. John Polowczyk acknowledged at the briefing with Mr. Trump on Monday that FEMA had only in recent days formed a task force to find personal protective equipment for the states, a sign that the agency is in the initial phase of finding resources that have been desperately needed for weeks.

The challenge for FEMA, disaster response experts said, is that it has never before faced a sudden and nationwide demand for an emergency response, as it is usually focused on more regional events like hurricanes, flooding or earthquakes.

The competing interests among states — which now suddenly all have immediate demands — present a significant challenge to the agency, which suffers from chronic understaffing, according to Chris Currie, the director of the section of the Government Accountability Office that wrote a 2017 report on the shortages.

“FEMA doesn’t have enough people to send out to every state in the country,” Mr. Currie said. “Now that they’ve turned the lever and FEMA is involved, they’ve brought those capabilities to bear, but we’ve never had a public health emergency on this scale.”

Peter T. Gaynor, the FEMA administrator, acknowledged the challenge his agency was facing: hundreds of requests for the same set of medical supplies.

“The demand on these critical items is not only nationally, it’s globally,” he said during an interview on CNN on Sunday. “So, we have been shipping. We’re going to ship tomorrow. We’re linking supplies, not only from the national stockpile, but from vendors and commercial donations.”

Despite this challenge, there is widespread evidence of the start-up of a large-scale federal response.

As of Monday morning, FEMA had dispatched incident management and liaison teams to 59 communities, an increase from the 44 working with local leaders last week, according to daily briefings produced by the agency.

The teams are integrated into local emergency operations centers, where they work alongside city and state officials and facilitate requests for additional supplies, said Lizzie Litzow, a FEMA spokeswoman. Still, Ms. Litzow said the agency was encouraging governors to buy the equipment themselves. The agency will then reimburse the states, she said.

Gen. Mark A. Milley, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said on Monday that Army field hospitals would arrive in New York and Seattle in the next three days, bringing to each city the ability to care for an additional 248 patients.

The hospitals, one to each city, will have 11 ventilators each, General Milley told reporters during a telephone briefing. But Defense Department officials said the field hospitals would most likely not be used to treat patients with the coronavirus. Instead, they will free up hospital beds in other New York and Seattle area hospitals.

“In 72 hours or earlier, you will see combat vehicles pulling into Seattle and New York,” General Milley said. Other military mobile combat hospitals around the country are on prepare-to-deploy orders, and may soon be headed to stricken areas, he said. Meanwhile, the San Diego-based Navy hospital ship, the Mercy, is headed to Los Angeles with its 1,000 beds.

General Milley said that he had told the Army units operating the field hospitals, with their staff of doctors, nurses and medical specialists, to begin deploying, but added that the Defense Department was waiting for a final go-ahead from FEMA.

Last week, FEMA’s focus was to assist the Department of Health and Human Services with future needs and producing products that raised awareness of the outbreak, according to documents from the agency. Now, the agency’s teams are working with officials from the department to stand up testing sites and additional hospital space, according to a briefing.

The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers received orders to begin construction in New York — its first such assignment from FEMA during the outbreak — on Saturday, according to Raini Brunson, a spokeswoman for the agency. The corps has identified four locations for temporary hospitals in Manhattan and Nassau, Suffolk and Westchester Counties.

The corps is also planning on building hospital space in other states but has yet to receive a directive to begin. And it has not awarded a contract for the construction in New York, a process that could take weeks.

Teams from FEMA, the Department of Health and Human Services and the corps did a walk-through at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in Manhattan on Monday morning to begin turning it into a “medical surge space” that could house 3,500 hospital beds. But Deanne Criswell, New York City’s emergency management commissioner and a former senior FEMA official, said she had not been told when the facility would be ready for patients — the most important question for the city.

“In all my years of disaster management, the most precious commodity is always time,” she said. “And what we’ve lost is time.”

New York City has received two shipments of protective equipment from the administration, totaling 640,000 N95 masks and 500,000 surgical masks, including tens of thousands that are expired. Early Monday morning, an additional 400 ventilators were delivered to the city. Mayor Bill de Blasio sent a letter on March 20 to Vice President Mike Pence, who is leading the White House response to the virus, that reiterated the city’s need for three million N95 masks, 50 million surgical masks and 15,000 ventilators.

The White House also committed to sending 55 gallons of hand sanitizer and 200,000 gloves, although the city has not received the materials.

Mr. Hogan, the Maryland governor, also said on Monday that the state asked for help from the Army Corps of Engineers and the National Guard to set up a hospital at a convention center in Baltimore, and an adjacent hotel. FEMA will be in charge of delivering the equipment and personnel for 250 beds that will be part of this new hospital complex.

Mr. Gaynor, the FEMA leader, said on Sunday that the agency was trying to be responsive to the various requests for help it was fielding. The Mercy, a Navy-owned hospital ship, is “immediately” going to go to California, he said, to help treat patients not suffering from the coronavirus, leaving more beds in California hospitals to treat those with the virus. But he said it could be a week before the ship is in place.

“We are filling the governors’ request, and so we send that resource to them,” he said, referring to the sudden requests for more hospital beds. “They’ll put it to best use. They’ll be put to where they — it will have the most effect. So we don’t dictate exactly where it goes.”

Helene Cooper and Ana Swanson contributed reporting.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — In a series of decisions, the Supreme Court on Monday ruled that states may abolish a common form of the insanity defense, that an entrepreneur suing Comcast for race discrimination must meet a demanding standard and that states are immune from claims of copyright infringement.

In their latest response to the coronavirus, the justices did not take the bench to announce the decisions, a sharp break with their practice in cases in which there were oral arguments.

On Friday, some of the justices also participated by phone during their usual private conference to discuss which appeals to hear, said Kathleen Arberg, a court spokeswoman. She did not say which justices were working from home.

The justices who did turn up for the conference skipped a longstanding custom at the court, that of each justice shaking hands with every other justice each time they convene.

Several of the justices are in the demographic group thought to be most at risk from the coronavirus: notably Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, who is 87, and Justice Stephen G. Breyer, who is 81. Four other members of the court — Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. and Justices Clarence Thomas, Samuel A. Alito Jr. and Sonia Sotomayor — are 65 or older.

The justices were to have started a two-week stretch of arguments on Monday, but those have been postponed. It is not clear whether or when they will be rescheduled. It issued its opinions on its website at five-minute intervals and in ascending order of the author’s seniority, roughly tracking how the decisions would have been announced had the court been in session.

These were the major decisions:

The court ruled that the Constitution does not require Kansas to use a common form of the insanity defense, one that allows criminal defendants to avoid conviction if they can show that their mental illness prevented them from recognizing that their criminal act was morally wrong.

Kansas eliminated that version of the insanity defense about two decades ago. It instead allows defendants to argue that they lacked the required intent to commit the crime with which they were charged. Defendants may also argue for more lenient sentences based on mental illness.

The case concerned James Kahler, who was sentenced to death in 2011 for killing four family members. His lawyers said he had severe depression that made it impossible for him to understand reality or distinguish right from wrong. Under the Kansas law, similar to those of Alaska, Idaho, Montana and Utah, Mr. Kahler was barred from raising the defense that his mental illness prevented him from knowing his actions were wrong.

Writing for the majority, Justice Elena Kagan said the Constitution’s due process clause allowed states to choose the more restrictive approach to the insanity defense.

“That choice is for Kansas to make — and, if it wishes, to remake and remake again as the future unfolds,” she wrote. “No insanity rule in this country’s heritage or history was ever so settled as to tie a state’s hands centuries later.”

Chief Justice Roberts and Justices Thomas, Alito, Neil M. Gorsuch and Brett M. Kavanaugh joined Justice Kagan’s majority opinion in the case, Kahler v. Kansas, No. 18-6135.

Justice Kagan’s usual liberal allies dissented. “Kansas has not simply redefined the insanity defense,” wrote Justice Breyer, joined by Justices Ginsburg and Sotomayor. “Rather, it has eliminated the core of a defense that has existed for centuries.”

The court ruled that Byron Allen, an African-American entrepreneur, had to meet a demanding standard in a lawsuit saying that Comcast, the nation’s largest cable company, had discriminated against him based on his race in its decision not to carry programming from his network.

The case, Comcast Corporation v. National Association of African-American-Owned Media, No. 18-1171 concerns a Reconstruction-era federal law that gives “all persons” the same right to “make and enforce contracts” as “is enjoyed by white citizens.”

The question for the justices was whether Mr. Allen’s company, Entertainment Studios, had to assert at an early stage in its lawsuit that race was a determinative reason for Comcast’s decision rather than just one factor among many. In legal terms, the question was whether Entertainment Studios had to say in its complaint that race was a “but for” cause of Comcast’s decision or a mere “motivating factor.”

Justice Gorsuch, writing for a unanimous court, said that Mr. Allen had to meet the more demanding standard that race was a “but for” cause. He said the appeals court should decide whether the allegations in Mr. Allen’s lawsuit were enough to clear that higher bar.

In its lawsuit, Entertainment Studios said Comcast had expressed interest in its programming but never closed a deal, reversed its position on what Entertainment Studios needed to do to secure carriage and carried every network that its main competitors did except Entertainment Studios. The lawsuit also said that Comcast offered space to “lesser-known, white-owned” networks even as it said it lacked capacity to carry Entertainment Studios. Comcast has disputed the allegations.

In a concurring opinion, Justice Ginsburg suggested that the allegations might be sufficient to allow the case to move forward.

In a statement, Comcast said that it was committed to diversity and that its victory was a modest one. “The nation’s civil rights laws have not changed with this ruling; they remain the same as before the case was filed,” the company said.

Civil rights groups expressed dismay. “This ruling weakens our nation’s oldest civil rights statute and may shut the courthouse door on some discrimination victims,” Kristen Clarke, president of the Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights Under Law, said in a statement.

In a third decision, the court ruled that an underwater videographer may not sue North Carolina for using his copyrighted videos of the submerged remains of a ship that had been used by the pirate Blackbeard.

After a private company discovered the wreckage in 1996, it hired the videographer, Frederick Allen, to film and photograph its ambitious underwater salvage work. Mr. Allen copyrighted the images and videos he created, but North Carolina officials posted five of his videos on a YouTube channel and printed one of his photographs in a newsletter.

Justice Kagan, writing for the majority, said Mr. Allen could not sue. The Constitution, she wrote, granted states sovereign immunity, shielding them from federal lawsuits.

A 1990 federal law, the Copyright Remedy Clarification Act, tried to allow copyright lawsuits against states, saying that they “shall not be immune, under the 11th Amendment of the Constitution of the United States or under any other doctrine of sovereign immunity,” from such lawsuits.

Under the court’s precedents, Justice Kagan wrote, Congress was powerless to enact the law, dooming Mr. Allen’s case, Allen v. Cooper, No. 18-877. Six justices joined most or all of her opinion, and all of the justices agreed on the bottom line.

<|endoftext|>

How to stay safe. How to protect others. How much risk to take when the smallest act can be a risk: touching a doorknob, buying milk. Whether or not the virus has reached your neighborhood, what’s swept into everyone’s lives is a set of confounding dilemmas.

So send your questions to us, at dilemmas@nytimes.com. There’s a saying in journalism: The solution is always more reporting. And that’s what we’ll do in coming weeks in this new column.

I was just at Target in Honolulu, it’s full of crisis tourists from the mainland talking about how they came to Hawaii to isolate from coronavirus, and I’m enraged. This is the perfect storm about to hit Hawaii. We have a doctor shortage, and many of our doctors are elderly. We have a weak social safety net and an economy overly dependent on tourism. These outsiders could push us over the edge, especially because tourists are often prioritized at the expense of local residents.KHARA TAPAY JABOLA-CAROLUS, Honolulu, Hawaii

Tensions over this question are rising by the hour. Wary of a long, confined spring, city dwellers are fanning out to vacation rentals, their own second homes, or anywhere else they can find. Airbnb bookings by urban customers traveling to nonurban areas are surging, according to a spokesman. “I can’t just imagine staying in an apartment with a dog and a child when there’s a lawn and space upstate,” said Natasha Schull, 48, a cultural anthropologist at New York University who left Manhattan on Thursday for her home in Delaware County. Worried about a medical condition that predisposes her to pneumonia, she checked the number of ventilators available at the hospital there: 12.

It’s an instant national ethical dilemma, exacerbating already-tense relationships between rich and poor, urban and rural, and, in the case of Hawaii, largely white outsiders and more diverse locals. Who gets to shelter where? Or take the last sack of flour at a small supermarket, or one of those precious upstate ventilators?

Destinations known for welcoming visitors are now closing themselves off. After Ms. Jabola Carolus wrote, Hawaii announced a mandatory 14-day quarantine for all incoming travelers. Southeast Utah has prohibited lodging for nonessential visitors, and Colorado has announced it doesn’t want tourists either. The Outer Banks of North Carolina are shut to nonresidents. The Maine island of North Haven went even further, barring all visitors, including seasonal residents.

History shows that may be the correct call. During the 1918 influenza pandemic, Gunnison, Colo., erected barricades over its highways (“against the world,” in the words of a county physician) and quarantined anyone who entered. Neighboring towns were decimated, but Gunnison’s losses were low. Yerba Buena, an island in San Francisco Bay with a military base and a population of 5,000, locked down for two months with similar results.

Projections of the virus’s spread show the brutal truth: Fellow city dwellers, we pose a threat to everyone else.

But these remote locations are already flooded with visitors who may not be going home for months. Some sort of compact will be necessary, according to interviews with officials in rural and resort towns, second-home owners and coronavirus expatriates.

So, before relocating, consider whether farther truly equals safer, especially if you’ll be far from the kind of vast medical corps found in major cities, as well as friends and neighbors to count on in an emergency.

Lise King, a Select Board member in Provincetown, the summer arts haven at the outer tip of Cape Cod, Mass., posted a Facebook message on Thursday that she found painful to write. She thinks of her town as welcoming, and is proud of its history as a refuge for gay men who fell ill during the AIDS crisis. But that day, she had heard reports about plane after plane touching down at the tiny Provincetown airport.

“TO ANYONE THINKING ABOUT COMING TO PTOWN,” she started. “PLEASE make yourself aware of our circumstances and make an informed choice,” she said. “If you come here and fall ill you are taking a risk that we won’t have the capacity to help you.” By Sunday night, Provincetown had two confirmed cases of the virus, a shelter-in-place order and a parking ban for nonresidents.

For the same reasons, day trippers looking for bucolic, socially distanced hikes are no longer welcome in the ski town of Hunter N.Y., said Sean Mahoney, a councilman. He has shut down the handful of Airbnb properties he manages, though the revenue loss is painful, and he has asked others to do the same.

If you do relocate, drive directly to the house and quarantine in place to avoid inadvertently spreading the disease, Ms. Schull suggested. Bring what you need, so that you don’t take groceries from locals. “We have one supermarket in our town that serves five towns,” Mr. Mahoney said.

Finally, find a way to help. Give to local charities. Ask what officials on the ground need. In recent days, Ms. King has been assembling a volunteer corps, and one of her conscripts is Dr. Scott Adelman, a second-home owner who is a recently retired cardiologist.

“Maybe I’ll backfill shifts at local clinics,” Dr. Adelman said, “or run medical supplies.”

“If we’re going to get through this as a society, everyone’s got to take a piece,” he said. “No one is prepared for this, and no one can do it by themselves.”

My mom just started chemotherapy a month ago, so she is severely immunocompromised. Our dilemma is figuring out how to protect her from exposure while still caring for her. Do we stay distant from her when she already has so much mental burden from chemo?MEAGAN WILKINSON, Mission Viejo, Calif.

The Wilkinson family — two parents and four teenage-to-20-something children — all live in the same house. They’re so close that, in ordinary times, their idea of fun is to all pile onto Mom and Dad’s bed to watch “The Bachelor.”

But in late January, Diana, a 56-year-old math teacher, learned she had a rare, aggressive form of endometrial cancer and a 50/50 chance of survival. Her husband and children have been told to keep their distance, because chemotherapy has left her vulnerable to infection. The family is especially jittery because one daughter recently returned from Italy after her study abroad program skidded to a halt. Another is a U.S. Marine who spends weekdays on a base where others have tested positive for coronavirus. Meagan has become the enforcer, telling her mother to separate herself. Mrs. Wilkinson feels hurt. Meagan feels guilty.

So the Wilkinsons are living a more acute version of our collective dilemma: longing for connections they once took for granted, terrified of making mistakes and unsure how to get through the coming months.

“I break the rules sometimes,” Mrs. Wilkinson confessed, choking back tears. “‘Just put on some clean clothes and lie down next to me,’” she said she tells her children when she can no longer bear being several feet away.

To seek help for the Wilkinsons, and the rest of us, I turned to authorities on how to cope with social distancing: therapists who advise cancer patients and their families, including during treatments like stem-cell transplants, which can involve prolonged isolation and other measures to guard against infection.

Ian Sadler, a psychologist at Columbia University Medical Center, gently dismissed Meagan Wilkinson’s fear that she would damage her mother by not hugging her. Distancing can be an act of care, he said. A lack of embrace is now an embrace.

Allison Applebaum, a psychologist at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan, worried about the burden on the Wilkinson children. Maintaining complete distance and cleanliness, monitoring contact and food, is “an enormous source of anxiety,” she said, for them and now everyone else. “You can’t do it perfectly a hundred percent of the time.” Note to everyone who is wiping, washing and Clorox-ing these days: in some cancer caregivers, the responsibility of constantly trying to eliminate germs contributes to post-traumatic stress symptoms, she said.

To find a substitute for cuddling, Dr. Applebaum suggested an exercise she does with her patients. If a father longs to play ball outside with his son, she asks him: “What was it about playing ball in the backyard that was meaningful? Was it about the ball, or was it connecting with him?” The goal is to find an alternate activity that delivers similar satisfaction.

Some of her current patients have only a few months to live and, because of the virus, are now being forced to cancel final-wish, bucket-list trips they had planned to take this spring. She asks them: “What is it about going to Paris that’s so special? Is it the physical act of getting on the plane, or is it a memory you wanted to recreate in Paris?”

After hearing that advice, Mrs. Wilkinson said she was trying to find new ways to be with her children, and to feel less wounded when they step away. As her family watches movies in the living room, she does too, from a balcony above them. Last weekend, she was content to watch as they played music and joked in the sun.

But as Dr. Applebaum suggested, perfect adherence is elusive. Sometimes Tommy Wilkinson, the youngest, swoops in for a furtive hug. “Nobody’s looking,” he says.

Grace Ashford contributed research.

Please send your dilemmas, or suggestions for this column, to dilemmas@nytimes.com.

<|endoftext|>

President Trump on Sunday night said that the government would reassess the recommended period for keeping businesses shut and millions of workers at home after this week, amid millions of job losses caused by the efforts to contain the spread of the novel coronavirus.

“WE CANNOT LET THE CURE BE WORSE THAN THE PROBLEM ITSELF,” Mr. Trump tweeted in all capital letters shortly before midnight. “AT THE END OF THE 15 DAY PERIOD, WE WILL MAKE A DECISION AS TO WHICH WAY WE WANT TO GO!”

Officials have said that the initial 15-day period for social distancing — limiting close contact between people by banning gatherings, closing schools and offices, encouraging remote work and urging people to maintain a six-foot distance from one another — is vital to slowing the spread of the virus, for which more than 30,000 people in the United States have tested positive. The 15-day period would end Monday.

Dr. Anthony Fauci, an infectious diseases expert and a member of the White House coronavirus task force, has said in interviews that he believed that it would take several more weeks until people can start going about their lives in a more normal fashion. Other infectious disease experts suggest even harsher measures than social distancing are required to truly beat back the outbreaks in the United States.

But at the White House, in recent days, there has been a growing sentiment that medical experts were allowed to set policy that has hurt the economy, and there has been a push to find ways to let people start returning to work. Some Republican lawmakers have also pleaded with the White House to find ways to restart the economy, as financial markets continue to slide and job losses for April could be in the millions.

Vice President Mike Pence indicated on Sunday at a White House briefing about the virus that the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention would issue new guidelines on Monday, allowing some people who have been exposed to the coronavirus to resume working outside their homes if they wear masks.

The move could set the stage for states with relatively low numbers of cases to begin to unfreeze their economies, while large states like California and New York — where there are more cases and where state officials have ordered nonessential businesses to close for the time being — could continue remaining in a holding pattern.

While some business owners are eager to end the more draconian measures that have been put in place, others would rather endure the pain at once rather than face repeated, disruptive orders to stop activities.

Mr. Trump’s tweet cast doubt on his confidence in the path to fighting the virus that he so reluctantly approved. For two months he largely dismissed the warnings that the virus would reach American shores, for fear of causing economic disruption, predicting that cases would go down from a handful to “zero” in a few days.

Only when the disruption came anyway, in the form of a historic stock market sell-off, was he convinced to act.

But there could be consequences to ending the measures too quickly. The recent rise of imported cases in Hong Kong, after there had been an easing of the spread of the virus, is something of an object lesson about how difficult it is for any territory to keep the virus out.

In a tweet on Monday morning, Thomas Bossert, the former homeland security adviser who for weeks has been vocal about the need for the U.S. government to take stricter measures, said, “Sadly, the numbers now suggest the U.S. is poised to take the lead in #coronavirus cases. It’s reasonable to plan for the US to top the list of countries with the most cases in approximately 1 week. This does NOT make social intervention futile. It makes it imperative!”

Whatever the president chooses to do, there will be businesses still fearful to reopen — and employees fearful of going to work — as new cases of people infected with the virus are still being diagnosed by the thousands each day.

And the president is facing potential pushback from the public health experts in his administration.

After being slow to publicly react to the spread of the virus, the Trump administration swung in the other direction at the end of February, entrusting the health experts whose counsel had not been heeded in the preceding weeks and letting them help set the policies that hundreds of millions of people would be urged to follow.

But Mr. Trump has become frustrated with Dr. Fauci’s blunt approach at the briefing lectern, which often contradicts things the president has just said, according to two people familiar with the dynamic.

Mr. Trump knows that Dr. Fauci is seen as credible with a large swath of the public and with journalists, and so he has given him more leeway to contradict him than he has other officials. But the president has also resisted portraying the virus as an existential threat in a way that the public health experts have.

In an interview with Science Magazine that was posted online on Sunday evening, Dr. Fauci responded to a question about how he had managed not to get fired by saying that, to Mr. Trump’s “credit, even though we disagree on some things, he listens.”

“He goes his own way,” Dr. Fauci continued. “He has his own style. But on substantive issues, he does listen to what I say.”

But he also said there was a limit to what he could do when Mr. Trump said things that were not true during those briefings.

“I can’t jump in front of the microphone and push him down,” Mr. Fauci said of Mr. Trump’s erroneous statements. “OK, he said it. Let’s try and get it corrected for the next time.”

In an interview with Fox Business Network, the Treasury secretary, Steven Mnuchin, stressed that the U.S. economy was still functioning.

“I’ve seen a bunch of fake news over the last couple of days about a complete shutdown of the economy,” he said. “The president has not made that decision.”

Later, in another Fox interview, Mr. Mnuchin said, “The cure can’t be worse than the disease.”

The president’s interest in potentially easing some of the social behavior guidelines met with pushback from one of his close allies, Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina.

“President Trump’s best decision was stopping travel from China early on,” Mr. Graham tweeted on Monday. “I hope we will not undercut that decision by suggesting we back off aggressive containment policies within the United States.”

David McIntosh, the president of the anti-tax Club for Growth, suggested Friday that the damage to the economy was severe.

“We need to act to contain the virus, but at the same time more people would be hurt and have terrible health and life consequences if they don’t reopen the economy,” Mr. McIntosh said. “They have to put an end to the social distancing some time in the near future to restore economic activity.”

Carl Hulse contributed reporting.

<|endoftext|>

With President Trump providing daily televised briefings and governors like Andrew M. Cuomo emerging as national leaders during the coronavirus pandemic, former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. is still grappling with how to position himself as a prominent voice on a crisis that is pushing traditional politics to the background.

Mr. Biden has been confined over the last week to an unusually small role for the likely — though not yet completely certain — nominee of a major political party. His public comments have been sparing and, for the most part, restrained. He is now ramping up a public schedule, beginning with an appearance on ABC’s “The View” on Tuesday, and his aides said he would offer remarks on camera in some fashion each day.

But Democratic strategists, some state officials and even some of his own aides have said that Mr. Biden needs to be more visible at a time when Americans are looking for leadership. The challenge for Mr. Biden, they say, is to find ways to draw sharp contrasts in leadership style with Mr. Trump while showing sensitivity to the severity of the crisis, and to break through when the nation is focused on more immediate concerns than November’s election.

Jim Margolis, a veteran Democratic strategist, said Mr. Biden had “walked that line really well, but it’s hard.” 

“The task is, are you able to cut through?” Mr. Margolis said. “Are you able to cut through when Americans are consumed by a virus that is in the news, and that’s all that’s being discussed, whether on the Senate floor, the White House briefing room or in emergency rooms?”

Some Democrats have been perplexed at why Mr. Biden has not used his newfound free time to blitz television news shows, many of which are enjoying high ratings with so many people confined to their homes. He did not do any of the Sunday morning news programs and has also been absent from daytime cable news, which has been dominated by the daily briefings of Mr. Trump and Mr. Cuomo.

On Monday, a day after one of his own donors asked how he could become a bigger part of the national conversation, Mr. Biden gave a speech that was streamed live from his home in Delaware in which he criticized Mr. Trump’s response to the virus as too slow and insufficient, and pressed him to act like the “wartime president” he says he is. 

But his address offered a reminder of the continuing challenge he faces in getting attention, even when he does speak out. CNN, Fox News and MSNBC did not air his speech, instead showing a briefing by Mr. Cuomo of New York.

“The whole country is focused on one issue and one issue only,” said Teddy Goff, who served as a top digital strategist for the campaigns of President Barack Obama in 2012 and Hillary Clinton in 2016. “It’s certainly going to be very difficult to break through on other issues. But it’s essential for the person who’s highly likely to be our Democratic nominee to have a strong voice on this issue.”

Andrew Bates, a spokesman for the Biden campaign, said, “These are uncharted waters for any campaign but our campaign is ready to carry Joe Biden’s message forward through innovative virtual events and digital outreach.”

“Vice President Biden’s voice represents competence, strength and empathy,” he added, qualities he said the nation was craving “as we confront unprecedented challenges.”

Mr. Biden has reached out to the House speaker, Nancy Pelosi; the Senate minority leader, Chuck Schumer; Mr. Cuomo; and Gov. Jay Inslee of Washington, among others, to express his concern and solicit their thoughts about how to confront the pandemic, according to Democrats familiar with the conversations. 

But advisers to Mr. Biden have acknowledged the need for a more robust public presence than the former vice president has managed since his victories in last Tuesday’s primaries, describing the process of finding the right tone and format for Mr. Biden’s message as a work in progress. His campaign has assured political donors and other supporters that it is testing different approaches and formulating a strategy for using TV and digital options for projecting his personality and delivering criticism of Mr. Trump.

Mr. Biden intends to significantly increase his public activity this week, according to an aide familiar with his plans: In addition to appearing on “The View,” he plans to call into radio shows and take questions from reporters, and he is likely to hold a virtual town hall and some kind of question-and-answer session on social media. Additional television appearances are in the works.

Mr. Biden’s direct rebuke of the president on Monday morning was by far his sharpest set of comments on camera since the virus began to spread in the United States. “Let me be clear: Donald Trump is not to blame for the coronavirus, but he does bear responsibility for our response,” he said. “And I, along with every American, hope he steps up and starts to get this right.”

Mr. Biden’s reluctance to take a more prominent role as the crisis deepened reflects in part his personal instincts and sense of political boundaries, according to his advisers and close allies. A more than 40-year veteran of the legislative and executive branches, he is deferential to his party’s current leaders and does not want to complicate their already difficult tasks at a moment of crisis.

That kind of calculation has surfaced before in this campaign. Last year, for example, he was reluctant to push for Mr. Trump’s impeachment in part because he did not want to put pressure on Ms. Pelosi and members of her caucus. This left him in the odd position of being the last of the major Democratic candidates to call for impeachment, even though the charges involved Mr. Trump pressing for an investigation into Mr. Biden and his son.

Mr. Biden still has the unresolved matter of the Democratic primary, though the party’s major institutions have continued to swing behind his candidacy even amid the quasi-national lockdown. The American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees endorsed Mr. Biden on Monday, and another major union, the American Federation of Teachers, backed him on Sunday.

Complicating matters for Mr. Biden is the reality that, for the first time in decades, he is campaigning for office without an existing role in government, of the kind he had as a senator when he ran for vice president during the 2008 economic meltdown. Mr. Biden released a plan to address the coronavirus this month, but unlike many of the senators and governors who competed against him for this year’s Democratic nomination, he has no active position from which to shape policy.

For much of the 2020 campaign, that detachment from daily governing was an asset to Mr. Biden, freeing him from the confines of a day job managing a state or casting votes on legislation. Now, however, it has left him further from the center of action than former rivals like Senators Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts and Kamala Harris of California, or his lone remaining competitor, Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont. 

Mr. Biden’s answer so far has been, in part, to build a kind of government-in-exile, showcasing the policy experts he would draw upon in the White House and seeking to present a contrast with Mr. Trump’s approach. A public health advisory committee Mr. Biden named this month was something of a model: His advisers are said to be assembling a far larger network of policy experts than the one he employed throughout the Democratic primary.

Those experts may begin to take a larger role as surrogates for the campaign on television and online. The Biden campaign was encouraged by the response it got over the weekend to a four-minute video it posted featuring Ron Klain, a former chief of staff to Mr. Biden who coordinated the Obama administration’s response to Ebola. The straightforward, policy-heavy presentation, which unpacked the current pandemic and pinned heavy responsibility on Mr. Trump for his response, got more than four million views on Twitter.

But Mr. Biden’s absence from public view made him the subject of taunts on Twitter, where hashtags like #WhereIsJoe have been used to skewer him, including by Trump campaign officials. “Is Ron Klain now the Democrat candidate for president?” Tim Murtaugh, the Trump campaign’s communications director, wrote on Twitter on Saturday.

And during a virtual fund-raiser on Sunday, Mr. Biden fielded a question about his limited visibility. “What I’m concerned about is that we see Donald Trump every day with this crisis giving his press report,” a donor said, according to a pool report. “And I would just love to see you more. Like, how do we get more of you and less of him on our airwaves?”

To help Mr. Biden reach the public even while he is hunkered down, his campaign turned a room in his house into a makeshift television studio. He spoke on Monday from a lectern bearing a Biden sign, just as if he were on the campaign trail. 

The nation’s “focus, for at least the short term, is not going to be on the presidential race,” said Mr. Margolis, the veteran Democratic strategist. Still, he continued: “Four weeks from now, you have to make sure you’re engaging in a campaign that is going to be decided this year. He does not have the opportunity to sort of sit back and wait three months to see where the whole thing lands.”

Jonathan Martin and Katie Glueck contributed reporting.

<|endoftext|>

Former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., the likely Democratic nominee against President Trump in this year’s general election, was asked a question during a virtual fund-raiser on Sunday that reflected a challenge looming over his campaign as the coronavirus outbreak intensifies.

“What I’m concerned about is that we see Donald Trump every day with this crisis giving his press report,” said one donor, according to a pool report from the fund-raiser, which was conducted by telephone. “And I would just love to see you more. Like, how do we get more of you and less of him on our airwaves?”

Mr. Biden has been taunted by online critics over his relatively low profile since the coronavirus forced him off the campaign trail, with Trump campaign officials and others needling him with the hashtag #WhereIsJoe. The former vice president has not made an appearance on camera in front of the public since he gave a brief live-streamed address from his home on Tuesday, when primaries were held in Florida, Illinois and Arizona.

At Sunday’s fund-raiser, Mr. Biden said that a recreation room in his home in Delaware had been turned into a television studio, and that he planned to give remarks on Monday. On a conference call with reporters on Friday, Mr. Biden said his campaign was working to increase his ability to speak to the public.

“I want to be in daily or at least, you know, significant contact with the American people and communicate what I would be doing, what I think we should be doing and how we should be doing it,” Mr. Biden said.

Mr. Biden’s campaign got off to a rocky start with its efforts at virtual campaigning, as a “virtual town hall” with Illinois voters this month was marred by technical problems.

At Sunday’s virtual fund-raiser, Mr. Biden addressed speculation about whether Mr. Trump would try to postpone the general election because of the coronavirus. (The president does not have that authority.)

“The idea of postponing the electoral process is just, seems to me, out of the question,” Mr. Biden said. “I know there’s a lot of rumors and speculation as to, ‘Is the other guy going to try to postpone the election in November?’ and all that. There’s no need to do that.”

Mr. Biden also indicated that he was giving serious thought to his potential future running mate, saying that he must “start that vetting process relatively soon, meaning in a matter of weeks.”

“There will be a group that is in excess of six or seven people that I look at, because those background checks matter,” said Mr. Biden, who has gone through the process himself. He expressed hope that “once I pick someone, God willing if I’m the nominee, that there’s not going to be any snafu.”

Mr. Biden’s remaining opponent in the primary race, Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, has also shifted to campaigning virtually. Mr. Sanders held a live-streamed event on the coronavirus from Burlington, Vt., on Sunday, one of several such events he has done in recent days.

Since in-person campaigning came to a halt, Mr. Biden and his team have weighed in repeatedly about the coronavirus, sharply criticizing Mr. Trump’s handling of the crisis. But he has struggled to break through given the flood of news about the outbreak, and he lacks the kind of platform that is available to Mr. Trump, who has appeared daily at White House briefings on the virus.

Mr. Biden gave a speech about the coronavirus this month and released a plan for responding to the outbreak, and on Friday’s conference call with reporters, he urged the president to “stop saying false things.” But in the past week, he has been largely out of sight even as his campaign presses its case against Mr. Trump over his handling of the crisis.

Mr. Biden’s team has issued a number of written statements and has posted repeatedly on social media about the subject. His campaign released a video in which Ronald Klain, a former chief of staff to Mr. Biden who served as the Ebola response coordinator in the Obama White House, stands in front of a white board and discusses Mr. Trump’s handling of the virus and how Mr. Biden would respond. The video has now been seen four million times on Twitter.

Another video from the Biden campaign alternates between playing footage of Mr. Trump and Mr. Biden speaking about the coronavirus. “This moment calls for a president,” the video says at the end. “In November, you can elect one.”

A spokesman for the Trump campaign, Matt Wolking, on Sunday accused Mr. Biden of seeking to use the coronavirus for “political gain at the exact moment the country needs optimism and unity.”

“It’s also cowardly — because instead of showing his own face, Biden is having his advisers and allies do most of his dirty work for him,” he said.

Sydney Ember and Katie Glueck contributed reporting.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — The Treasury secretary and the top Senate Democrat said late Monday that they were on the brink of a deal on a nearly $2 trillion emergency economic aid measure to respond to the coronavirus pandemic, after a marathon day of talks as Democrats demanded stronger protections for workers and restrictions for bailed-out businesses.

Hours after Democrats voted to block action on the plan until they secured concessions and the Senate dissolved into partisan sniping, Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the minority leader, and Steven Mnuchin, the Treasury secretary, signaled that their private negotiations had yielded important breakthroughs that could clear the way for enactment of the plan within days.

“We expect to have an agreement in the morning,” Mr. Schumer told reporters just before midnight, adding that he hoped the Senate could vote by Tuesday evening. “There are still a few little differences.”

Mr. Mnuchin, who spent the day on Capitol Hill huddling with senators from both parties, said that a “lot of progress” had been made but that both sides would review draft text and other documents overnight.

The two men called President Trump just before they broke for the night, and Mr. Schumer said his response had been “very positive” despite a post on Twitter minutes before in which the president accused Democrats, led by Speaker Nancy Pelosi of California, of sabotaging the package and wanting “the Virus to win.”

Among other provisions, the two sides appeared to have reached an agreement, at least in principle, to ensure substantial oversight over a $500 billion economic stabilization fund that would be used to bail out distressed companies, according to two officials familiar with the talks. The officials, who were not authorized to discuss them publicly, said the details were still being worked out.

Despite a sense of desperation in both parties and at the White House about quickly enacting legislation to deliver critical financial support to businesses forced to shutter and relief to hard-pressed American families, sharp ideological differences between Republicans and Democrats have made it difficult to finalize a compromise.

The deep well of distrust between Democrats and Mr. Trump had been hampering agreement, and the shadow of the last huge government aid program approved by Congress — the Wall Street bailout in 2008 — hung over the talks, a cautionary tale of the political risks of sending federal money to corporations with unpredictable consequences.

The late-night optimism was a marked turnaround from earlier in the day, when the normally staid Senate dissolved into shouting and partisan bickering before the vote, as senators sparred over the stimulus package, which is emerging as the largest in modern history. Republicans blasted Democrats for delaying desperately needed economic aid, while Democrats said the measure under discussion did too little to help ordinary Americans or to ensure that federal money would not be abused by businesses that received aid.

“Are you kidding me?” Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader, demanded on the Senate floor. “This is not a juicy political opportunity. This is a national emergency.”

The remarkable scene unfolded the day after Democrats first blocked action on the measure. The 47-to-47 vote on Sunday evening shook markets around the globe and infuriated Republicans who said it ignored bipartisan talks that had yielded substantial compromises over the outlines of the measure.

The outcome was similar on Monday afternoon, as the Senate voted 49 to 46, again falling short of the 60 votes that would have been needed to go forward on the stabilization measure. Republicans insisted on holding the vote in the absence of an agreement, seizing an opportunity to portray Democrats as obstacles to a deal.

The markets reacted with a shudder, with the S&P 500 falling about 3 percent, even after the Federal Reserve said it would vastly expand its efforts to shore up businesses and keep markets functioning.

The defeat and the testy exchanges overshadowed the urgent set of negotiations that continued all day behind the scenes between Mr. Schumer and Mr. Mnuchin to iron out remaining differences. Mr. McConnell and Ms. Pelosi were kept closely apprised of the talks.

At the heart of the impasse in the Senate has been a $425 billion fund created by the bill that the Federal Reserve could leverage for loans to assist broad groups of distressed companies, and an additional $75 billion it would provide for industry-specific loans. Democrats raised concerns that the plan would not require sufficient transparency or enough guardrails around the funds to make sure companies do not use them to enrich themselves or take government money and lay off workers. They also argued the measure as written by Republicans would give Mr. Mnuchin too much discretion to decide which companies receive aid, calling the proposal a “slush fund” for the administration.

As the legislation is currently written, Mr. Mnuchin would not have to disclose the recipients until six months after the loans were disbursed. Some Democrats also said the legislation as written could allow Mr. Trump’s real estate empire to take advantage of the federal aid, and after years of being stonewalled by the White House on oversight requests, they worried that the administration would refuse attempts by Congress to keep tabs on the program.

At the White House on Monday evening, Mr. Trump only fueled Democrats’ concerns when he brushed aside questions about who would oversee the funds, saying: “Look, I’ll be the oversight. I’ll be the oversight.”

“It would be very foolish if they didn’t make a deal,” Mr. Trump said, accusing Democrats of “asking for things that bear no relationship to what we’re talking about.”

Mr. Mnuchin has argued that bolstering the newly created fund would allow the Federal Reserve to effectively inject $4 trillion into the economy, and that he needs the authority to swiftly support companies and industries that are on the brink of collapse as large sections of the economy shut down. On Monday, he pushed back against the suggestion that the money would become a piggy bank for Mr. Trump’s allies.

“I’ve heard people refer to this as a slush fund,” Mr. Mnuchin said on the Fox Business Network. “It’s not a slush fund.”

Hanging over the debate for senators in both parties were unpleasant memories of the stinging backlash from the 2008 and 2009 economic recovery programs that were later condemned on the right and left for helping Wall Street at the expense of working Americans. Democrats said they would not be bullied into supporting the stimulus package by Mr. McConnell, despite evident political risks as they face a battle for control of the Senate in November.

“The fact is, we need to learn from 10 years ago,” said Senator Sherrod Brown, Democrat of Ohio. “If we’re going to do relief package, the money needs to go in the pockets of workers.”

Democrats are pressing for more jobless aid and money for states as part of the agreement.

“Let’s be clear about what we are talking about here: We don’t think your bill works,” said Senator Christopher S. Murphy, Democrat of Connecticut. “This is a policy disagreement, and I have an obligation as a representative of my state to stand up and say when I don’t think a $2 trillion bill is going to solve the problem.”

Only one Democrat, Senator Doug Jones of Alabama, joined Republicans on Monday in voting to advance the package.

The debate beforehand was unusually fiery, and it escalated as Mr. Schumer repeatedly cut off attempts by Senator Susan Collins, Republican of Maine, to be recognized to speak.

“This is unbelievable,” Ms. Collins fumed, as other Republicans pushed to allow her to weigh in. She walked over to Mr. Schumer, pointing at him, and said: “You are objecting to my speaking? This is appalling.”

Senator Tom Cotton, Republican of Arkansas, muttering audibly, used a barnyard epithet to express his assessment of the situation.

When Ms. Collins did get to speak, she warned that time was running out to preserve small businesses in her state and across the country teetering on the brink of collapse.

“We don’t have another day,” she said. “We don’t have another hour. We don’t have another minute to delay acting. This is disgraceful.”

At the White House, Vice President Mike Pence sought to ratchet up pressure on Democrats to drop their opposition. On a conference call on Monday afternoon, he urged governors to press their states’ representatives to get the bill moving.

“Governors, it will make a real difference,” Mr. Pence said, according to a recording of the call obtained by The New York Times.

Senate Republicans and Democrats had already struck a number of major compromises on the package, including a tentative agreement on sending $1,200 government payments to those earning up to $75,000 a year, with an additional $500 per child. Smaller checks would be sent to those earning more, and there would be an upper eligibility limit of $99,000 in income.

By Monday night, they were closing in on an agreement on hundreds of billions of dollars to support hospitals struggling to care for the thousands infected by the coronavirus.

Democrats had also pushed to strengthen worker protections — arguing that the draft measure failed to prevent layoffs — and to enforce heavier restrictions on executive compensation and companies’ ability to buy back stock.

Democrats also want to extend jobless benefits in the legislation for an additional month. Republicans have already agreed to a large expansion of the unemployment insurance program, broadening it to include self-employed and part-time workers who traditionally have not been eligible, and to cover 100 percent of wages for three months.

There was also disagreement, according to two people familiar with the negotiations but who are unauthorized to discuss them publicly, over how much money to allocate to farmers and whether to expand nutrition assistance benefits. And Democrats have raised concerns about language that could prevent Planned Parenthood and community mental health providers that rely on Medicaid from receiving loans and an extension of an abstinence education program set to expire in May.

In the House, Democrats unveiled their own stimulus package, which would provide more than $2.5 trillion in federal spending. It remained unclear how that 1,404-page measure would be reconciled with any compromise legislation that emerges from the Senate negotiations.

“The Senate Republican bill put corporations first,” Ms. Pelosi said during brief televised remarks.

Raising the stakes on the negotiations, the perils of the pandemic have effectively forced House leaders to contemplate passing the huge package by unanimous consent, a procedure usually reserved for minor, noncontroversial measures that does not require a recorded vote. The House is not in session, and many of its members are scattered across the country — some of them sick or in quarantine — and are wary of flying back to Washington to vote.

Senior Democrats are considering a range of other options, including a rule change that would allow absent members to vote by proxy, in case any lawmaker objected to passing it without a vote, according to a Rules Committee report released late Monday.

The House bill introduced on Monday, according to summaries circulated by Democrats, would deliver $1,500 in direct payments to individuals and more than $150 billion to hospitals and government health programs, and it would create an unemployment compensation of $600 a week along with regular unemployment benefits.

It would also include a national requirement for 15 days of early voting and no-excuse absentee vote-by-mail and election funding and nearly $60 billion for schools and universities, coupled with free coronavirus treatment and expanded paid leave.

Mr. McConnell and other Republicans spent much of the day blaming Ms. Pelosi, who returned to Washington from San Francisco on Saturday to participate in the stimulus talks, for upending a productive set of bipartisan negotiations.

A senior Republican aide, speaking on the condition of anonymity to disclose details of the private negotiations, said Democrats were trying to use the stimulus measure to accomplish long-held, unrelated policy priorities, including expanding collective bargaining rights for unions, implementing an extension of solar and wind tax credits to help the renewable energy industry, and tying aid to airlines to gradual reductions on carbon dioxide emissions that they have long resisted.

Reporting was contributed by Carl Hulse, Alan Rappeport, Lisa Friedman and Jonathan Martin.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — Yuanyuan Zhu was walking to her gym in San Francisco on March 9, thinking the workout could be her last for a while, when she noticed that a man was shouting at her. He was yelling an expletive about China. Then a bus passed, she recalled, and he screamed after it, “Run them over.”

She tried to keep her distance, but when the light changed, she was stuck waiting with him at the crosswalk. She could feel him staring at her. And then, suddenly, she felt it: his saliva hitting her face and her favorite sweater.

In shock, Ms. Zhu, who is 26 and moved to the United States from China five years ago, hurried the rest of the way to the gym. She found a corner where no one could see her, and she cried quietly.

“That person didn’t look strange or angry or anything, you know?” she said of her tormentor. “He just looked like a normal person.”

As the coronavirus upends American life, Chinese-Americans face a double threat. Not only are they grappling like everyone else with how to avoid the virus itself, they are also contending with growing racism in the form of verbal and physical attacks. Other Asian-Americans — with families from Korea, Vietnam, the Philippines, Myanmar and other places — are facing threats, too, lumped together with Chinese-Americans by a bigotry that does not know the difference.

In interviews over the past week, nearly two dozen Asian-Americans across the country said they were afraid — to go grocery shopping, to travel alone on subways or buses, to let their children go outside. Many described being yelled at in public — a sudden spasm of hate that is reminiscent of the kind faced by American Muslims, Arabs and South Asians in the United States after the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.

But unlike in 2001, when President George W. Bush urged tolerance of American Muslims, this time President Trump is using language that Asian-Americans say is inciting racist attacks.

Mr. Trump and his Republican allies are intent on calling the coronavirus “the Chinese virus,” rejecting the World Health Organization’s guidance against using geographic locations when naming illnesses, since past names have provoked a backlash.

Mr. Trump told reporters on Tuesday that he was calling the virus “Chinese” to combat a disinformation campaign by Beijing officials saying the American military was the source of the outbreak. He dismissed concerns that his language would lead to any harm.

On Monday evening, Mr. Trump tweeted, “It is very important that we totally protect our Asian American community in the United States.” He added they should not be blamed for the pandemic, though he did not comment on his use of the phrase “Chinese virus.”

“If they keep using these terms, the kids are going to pick it up,” said Tony Du, an epidemiologist in Howard County, Md., who fears for his son, Larry. “They are going to call my 8-year-old son a Chinese virus. It’s serious.”

Mr. Du said he posted on Facebook that “this is the darkest day in my 20-plus years of life in the United States,” referring to Mr. Trump’s doubling down on use of the term.

While no firm numbers exist yet, Asian-American advocacy groups and researchers say there has been a surge of verbal and physical assaults reported in newspapers and to tip lines.

San Francisco State University found a 50 percent rise in the number of news articles related to the coronavirus and anti-Asian discrimination between Feb. 9 and March 7. The lead researcher, Russell Jeung, a professor of Asian-American studies, said the figures represented “just the tip of the iceberg” because only the most egregious cases would be likely to be reported by the media.

Professor Jeung has helped set up a website in six Asian languages to gather firsthand accounts; some 150 cases have been reported on the site since it was started last Thursday.

Benny Luo, founder and chief executive of NextShark, a website focused on Asian-American news, said the site used to get a few tips a day. Now it is dozens.

“We’ve never received this many news tips about racism against Asians,” he said. “It’s crazy. My staff is pulling double duty just to keep up.” He said he was hiring two more people to help.

No one is immune to being targeted. Dr. Edward Chew, the head of the emergency department at a large Manhattan hospital, is on the front lines of fighting the coronavirus. He said that over the past few weeks, he had noticed people trying to cover their nose and mouth with their shirts when they are near him.

Dr. Chew has been using his free time to buy protective gear, like goggles and face shields, for his staff in case his hospital runs out. On Wednesday night at a Home Depot, with his cart filled with face shields, masks and Tyvek suits, he said he was harassed by three men in their 20s, who then followed him into the parking lot.

“I heard of other Asians being assaulted over this, but when you are actually ridiculed yourself, you really feel it,” he said the following day.

A writer for The New Yorker, Jiayang Fan, said she was taking out her trash last week when a man walking by began cursing at her for being Chinese.

“I’ve never felt like this in my 27 yrs in this country,” she wrote on Twitter on Tuesday. “I’ve never felt afraid to leave my home to take out the trash bc of my face.”

Attacks have also gotten physical.

In the San Fernando Valley in California, a 16-year old Asian-American boy was attacked in school by bullies who accused him of having the coronavirus. He was sent to the emergency room to see whether he had a concussion.

In New York City a woman wearing a mask was kicked and punched in a Manhattan subway station, and a man in Queens was followed to a bus stop, shouted at and then hit over the head in front of his 10-year-old son.

People have rushed to protect themselves. One man started a buddy-system Facebook group for Asians in New York who are afraid to take the subway by themselves. Gun shop owners in the Washington, D.C., area said they were seeing a surge of first-time Chinese-American buyers.

At Engage Armament in Rockville, Md., most gun buyers in the first two weeks of March have been Chinese-American or Chinese, according to the owner, Andy Raymond.

More than a fifth of Rockville’s residents are of Asian ethnicity, and Mr. Raymond said buyers from Korean and Vietnamese backgrounds were not unusual. But Mr. Raymond said he was stunned by the flow of Chinese customers — in particular green-card holders from mainland China — that began earlier this month, a group that rarely patronized his shop before.

“It was just nonstop, something I’ve never seen,” he said.

Mr. Raymond said that few of the Asian customers wanted to talk about why they were there, but when one of his employees asked a woman about it, she teared up. “To protect my daughter,” she replied.

For recent immigrants like Mr. Du who are in close touch with friends and family in China, the virus has been a screaming danger for weeks that most Americans seemed oblivious to.

Mr. Du is trying to remain hopeful. He spends his weekends training to become a volunteer with Maryland’s emergency medical workers. He is part of a group of Chinese-American scientists who organized a GoFundMe account to raise money for protective gear for hospital workers in the area. In three days, they raised more than $55,000, nearly all in small donations.

But he said he was afraid of the chaos that could be unleashed if the United States death toll rises significantly.

Already a gun owner, Mr. Du, 48, said he was in the process of buying an AR-15-style rifle.

“Katrina is not far away,” he said, alluding to the unrest in New Orleans following Hurricane Katrina in 2005. “And when all these bad things come, I am a minority. People can see my face is Chinese, clearly. My son, when he goes out, they will know his parents are Chinese.”

transcript

Jiayang, do you remember the first time that you started thinking about the backlash in this country against Asian-Americans in response to the coronavirus?

Yeah, I mean, around, I guess, this is the beginning of March. I had seen on Instagram a friend and a fellow writer documenting an incident in Manhattan, where — I think he is Korean-American, and he was told by a stranger to get away. But I remember reading about that incident and thinking, “yeah, I mean, that’s really terrible that this has happened,” but wondering, is this a singular incident, or is there a trend?

As a journalist and perhaps by my own personal temperament, I’m pretty cautious. I don’t like to make sensational generalizations that go well on a headline. I feel like I need very convincing proof that something is happening before I call it. And especially as a Chinese-American, I wanted to make sure that I was not crying racism before I had the full evidence. I wonder if it’s because if I don’t make too big a deal out of it, it won’t be fully real.

From The New York Times, I’m Michael Barbaro. This is “The Daily.”

I get to the gate at LAX.

Home Depot.

In an Uber Pool.

A grocery store, Wegmans.

We were walking from the gym to get in our classrooms.

I got some milk, a little pasta. Most everything’s gone.

And at that moment, there was this guy, looked like a regular guy. He was staring at me.

As the death toll from the coronavirus rises in the U.S., so do reports of verbal and physical attacks against Asian-Americans —

And a couple of seats away from me, a man was seated. And presumably his wife comes back to sit down and says out loud —

“You people you, brought it. You’re sick.”

“Fuck China.”

“China is stupid.”

“I ought to kill you. I ought to shoot you.”

“This girl looks Chinese. She must have the virus. I can’t sit next to her.”

— Who say that they are being blamed for the pandemic.

A person at the White House used the term “kung-flu.” My question is, do you think that’s wrong?

Kung-flu?

Kung-flu. And do you think using the term “Chinese virus,” that puts Asian-Americans at risk, that people might target them?

No, not at all. No, not at all. I think they probably would agree with it 100%. It comes from China. There’s nothing not to agree with. I’ll have the last question.

Today —

When the president asked, I don’t think they would mind it being called the Chinese virus, I mind!

It did make me feel different, and didn’t really want to be Chinese because of the coronavirus.

Jiayang Fan, a writer for The New Yorker magazine, shares her story.

It’s Friday, April 10th.

Jiayang, can you tell me a little bit about your childhood? Where did you grow up?

I was born in 1984 in Chongqing, China. My mom was a doctor. My dad was a researcher. And he was one of the first batch of scholars sent to the U.S. to bring Western knowledge and technology back to China. So he leaves when I’m about two, so I have very little memory of him. But for my mom and I, life in China feels very serene and comfortable.



Whatever sense I have of the outside world, the world beyond China, is very, very vague and incredibly hazy, like I’m not quite sure it exists. But I think if one place were to stand out, it would be the United States.

I remember my mom and her friends talking about the show Dynasty, which did telegraph the glamor of the U.S.

I like that one. It’s a rather expensive fur. I like the mink. That is mink?

The sense that this is what an everyday Joe would inhabit.

And this of course, is a soap opera about an incredibly wealthy oil family living in a crazy gorgeous home, and driving along oil fields. So it’s actually quite exceptional.

My name happens to be Mrs. Steven Carrington. I’m not used to haggling over what suits me, or what it costs.

Well, it was the show, and it was also at the time in China what was very popular were these calendars of American families, where every member had golden hair, sparkling blue eyes and perfect bone structure, and they were always smiling with their perfect white teeth. They always were sitting by a perfect colonial house, or just out in nature, but in front of a park that they looked like they owned.

 And I remember the food that really encapsulated America to me were Cheerios.

Cheerios?

It’s the big yellow box that everyone knows.

Yes, Cheerios. I had no idea what they tasted like, but the company did fantastic branding in China.

Cheerios number one. We love it! Toasty oat goodness.

I remember the picture of the perfect baby on these ads for Cheerios. You know, the round cheeks, the blue eyes. That baby got to have this superior breakfast food that I, in all likelihood, would never get to taste.

Cheerios number one!

So there’s me, drinking my Chinese porridge, and eating my pickled vegetables, and having fantasies about Cheerios, which I learned years later to not be very tasty at all there. They’re actually tasteless.

To be like the definition of blandness, but in your mind, they are this superior food for this blond haired, perfect group of people.

Yeah, for superior people, to put it bluntly.

I mean, I still remember actually the first time I heard English. I think it might have been my fifth or sixth birthday, and my mom might have come back pretty recently from English language training sessions. And she just said the words “happy birthday.”

That was astounding to me. It was like my mom was superwoman, that she knew how to say this language that did not sound like a language to me. “Happy birthday.” I still remember the way the syllables came out of her mouth, and the image, which was of a tsunami.

There was this tidal wave of one syllable consuming the next one that, to me, was very incomprehensible. And I remember at the time thinking, “I will never learn this language. I have no hopes of ever learning this language.” Which is probably OK, because I only need one language, right? And it’s Chinese.

Oh.



But essentially something happens in the June of ‘89 that changes my father’s fate as well as that of my mom and I forever.

The noise of gunfire rose from all over the center of Peking.

The Tiananmen massacre.

There’s a mood of terror in the center of the city and quiet —

So the U.S. government immediately makes provisions for Chinese scholars, who might need to flee from China.

The demonstrators in Tiananmen Square —

And that was when my mother and I joined my father in the U.S.



What do you remember about first arriving in the U.S.?

We land in J.F.K., and my father is living at the time in New Haven, Connecticut. And that drive from J.F.K. to New Haven, it is gray and drab, like tones that are not at all what I had imagined. So I keep waiting for the real America to reveal itself to me. So it is a rude awakening when my dad leads us to his second floor studio. There’s just a mattress on the floor, and I think it takes me a good minute to realize that this is my new home. And the loss of a language is pretty traumatic for me.

How so?

School started a few months later, and I could not understand my teachers, my classmates. And repeatedly my new American teachers ask me, why aren’t you talking more? Why aren’t you engaging? And those expectations, I think, are hard for me to fully understand. And I feel like I’m walking blind into a game, where I don’t know the rules.

Mm-hm.

I mean, not only do I not speak the language, I’m bringing pickled fish and rice, and that’s not sitting well with the other kids at a lunch table. All I feel is defeat.

Hm. It sounds very lonely.

Yeah, retrospectively, I think what made me feel most lonely was that I couldn’t share those feelings with my mother. And I think for my mother, who worked very low paying menial labor jobs in the U.S., a drastic step down from her position as a doctor in China, she must have felt as marginalized and as embarrassed by her immigrant status as I do, but in an adult way, but similarly lacking in an emotional vocabulary to express those feelings.

What do you mean?

Like, I remember going to the mall for the first time with my mother. And my mom’s favorite pastime was window shopping, just looking at things that she couldn’t afford. And I remember one time someone trying to hand her maybe a flyer for some store, and she said, no, thanks. But she couldn’t pronounce it correctly, so this young man said “No sex? Did you say no sex? No sex?” And I think I was like 11 or 12 at the time. I remember that my mother actually just in this embarrassed way laughed, like out of anxiety, like she wanted it to be OK. She wanted to respond in a way to indicate that she was not offended. But I remember the way that my cheek just felt hot and red, they grew, and how I felt so humiliated on my mother’s behalf. And that experience feels seared into my brain, not just because of the insult, but because my mother had to swallow her own humiliation.

Did you understand, given your age, that this was racism? I mean, how did you process it in that moment?

I think I turned over the incident in my mind for a long time after that. I don’t think I would have coded it as racism. I think I almost only understood racism as something that white people inflicted on black people. I had no idea — or I had very little idea of how Asians fit into the landscape of race in the U.S. And I didn’t know how to understand incidents in which you were not called a very specific racial slur. Like that “no thanks, no sex?” Like —

What was that?

What was that? Exactly. I think as an 11-year-old, in my head, I didn’t want to be different. I didn’t want to be the one lashing out at others for being racist because inevitably that would make me seem even more different. And I think my mother, my mother was the closest person in my life. But if she had a religion, it would be survival. I learned from my mother not to rock the boat, not to shake the existing system, to basically understand how the existing system works, and then to ascend it in some way, to climb the ladder. As long as you fit in better, you will live a more comfortable life here. And that should be the goal.

And did things start to get a little bit better, eventually?

I start speaking better English. I start really enjoying and then falling in love with the English language, something that I thought would never happen. That’s really important for me, I have to admit. When that language, English, came to feel like a part of my body, I have to say that felt like a homecoming to me.

Hm. And how old are you at this point, where you’re starting to fall in love with the language?

I think around maybe 12 or 13.

Mm-hm.

And I’ll never forget the first time in sixth grade, when I said the phrase “come on.” Like, this sounds silly, but it was only sixth grade when I could comfortably say “come on” to a schoolmate, and I felt very triumphant.

As if to say, “enough of that, come on.”

Exactly. When I could say that, I was so aware of myself saying it, and I was saying it the way that a normal American speaker would say it. And I’ll never forget the sense of pride that coursed through me. And there was no one I could celebrate it with, right? Because imagine if then I turned to the classmate who I said “come on” with and said, “did you hear me? I just said come on!”

 That would have totally defeated its purpose, but I remember it, because it felt like a real Americanism. And it just rolled off my tongue.

So in that moment, you finally feel like you belong.

Exactly. But I still see myself predominantly as a visitor, and that my existence is pretty probational on good behavior. And if I behave well, I will be able to minimize the number of times that I stick out as someone who doesn’t belong.

But then I started to realize, that’s not exactly how it works.

We’ll be right back.

So, Jiayang, I wonder if you can tell me about what happened to you recently.

So this was in mid-March, when there were rumors that New York City would be put under lockdown because of coronavirus. And I wanted to make sure I had enough food in the house, if I had to stay in for an indefinite period of time.

Mm-hm.

And I was also really worried about my mother, who has a neurodegenerative disease and lives in a nursing home close by. I knew that I wouldn’t be able to see her for a while, and I had several errands lined up. One was to take out the trash. One was to mail my rent check. And one was to go a few blocks away to my neighbor’s house, to pick up a sack of rice.

It was around evening time, and I had just left my apartment building, and I was on the phone, talking to my mother’s health aide in Chinese. And as I was turning around after putting the trash in the trash bin — this is right in front of my apartment. I heard “Chinese, Chinese, Chinese bitch. Fucking Chinese.” But it all — I don’t think I fully believed what I was hearing. And when I made eye contact with him, he kept speaking. “You’re fucking Chinese.” And I realized that that I was comprehending that what he was saying did not stop him.

Mm-hm.

That was when in my ear, my mom’s aide paused and said, “Are you OK? Is something happening?” And I couldn’t really speak. I found myself walking down the street. I think I was still really set on, “I need to get rice,” but then I found it really hard to continue walking, because my legs just felt leaden. Like, I really, really wanted to continue walking. It would have only been a 10 minute walk away for me to fetch that rice, but I found myself coming to a halt. And even, I thought, if I just kept talking on the phone with my aide, but then I thought, “I’m talking in Chinese. Who else am I going to offend?” And then I just got off the phone. And once I got off the phone, I felt even more scared, because I was so aware of being alone.

So this is not embarrassment or even shame in this moment. This is just terror.

This is a very real sense of fright that I’m not going to make it to my friend’s house to get my sack of rice.

Jiayang, we started this conversation with you saying that your instinct, and maybe it’s because you’re a journalist, maybe it’s as an Asian-American, maybe it’s both, is to minimize these incidents, and to be slow to see them as part of a larger phenomenon. But it sounds like this was different for you. Am I right to think that?

Yeah, I mean, this is not the first time I’ve been called a Chinese bitch. But what was different about this incident was that this man seemed to really mean it. And I wondered.

I mean, in retrospect, right, I wondered at the relationship between the sense of conviction in the man’s voice, his certainty that he was in the right to point out my Chineseness and to call me a Chinese bitch.

Mm-hm.

And I think about the things that were going on in his day, like did he lose his job earlier in the day because of this virus? I mean, does he work in the service industry? Does he have a loved one who has also become a prisoner in a nursing home or hospital? And I think about the way that all those anxieties, and rage and sadness, might have hardened into something like an instrument, almost a weapon.

Hm.

And I think about me being a surface onto which he could use that weapon and lash out.

Hm.

And I think about the probational nature of my Chinese-American existence, in a sense that, in better times, in normal times, there are certain stereotypes that are cast upon me when I walk down the street. But in a moment of crisis, when it seems plausible that the country where I was born could be responsible for an unprecedented pandemic, that I become a person of suspicion, and I become someone who is quite easy perhaps to target all your ire and anxieties, and that maybe it gave him temporary relief to be able to identify someone or something as the cause for his hurt and for his anxieties.

So what do you do?

So I go home, double lock my door, pull out my phone and get on Twitter.



OK, yes. I describe what happened, and I tweet. I wasn’t offended. I was afraid. I was worried he knew where I lived. For the longest time, I’ve been telling friends in China that although racism against Chinese exists in this country, that’s not what I feel in a pandemic. I’ve never felt like this in my 27 years in this country. I’ve never felt afraid to leave my home to take out the trash because of my face.

I want to believe what happened is anomalous, and that we’re living in extraordinary times, and fear can deform us. I wonder now if I should have taken his picture.

I wonder what your mother would make of this incident. And I wonder what she would think of the fact that you decided to share what happened to you so publicly.

I think if I were to tell her about the experience, she might not fully understand the import of it. She would say, “Well, were you hurt?” And I would say, “No.” And she would say, “Well, did you lose anything?” And I would say, “No.” And she would say, “Do you feel like this man is going to cut you down and kill you now?” And I would say, “Probably not, no.” And she would say, “Well, why are you even telling me this? What is the big deal here?”

Hm.

Or if I were to tell her that I was having this conversation with you, she would say “Why make something out of nothing?” Right? She would say, “Why are you crying victim here? Why are you making this into a bigger deal than it really is? Do you want this to be how you’re remembered, for being that woman who was the victim of a non-incident?”

And what would you say in this imaginary conversation with your mother?

I think I would try in English, because I think it would be hard for me to find the words in Chinese to explain the significance of it, not on my physical well-being.

Help me understand what you mean.

Because for the longest — I mean, I think my mom and I both lived with this fiction that if we could be perfect versions of ourselves, for example, if my mother could pronounce “thanks” the way that it’s supposed to be pronounced, and for me, if I could say “come on” naturally, that had always been the goal of our American existence, was to somehow bend ourselves to a shape that America could accept. I never dared to believe that I could actually help to make America better. That was something I never dared to think was possible. But in experiencing this, it made me rethink my role as an American and how even me, even someone who is probationary, that I was in some very, very small way contributing to this country by pointing out the ways that it’s failing itself, making clear the way in which this country still makes me feel ashamed, is possibly one way in which I can make it better.

Hm.

And also, that’s the best version of America. Like in all the conceptions of America that exist in my head, I actually think this ability to call out the worst parts of America to itself, my freedom to do so, this feels to me the most miraculous part of America.

But I think all of that would be, frankly, a bit too abstract to my mother. I think her quest for survival has been so concrete and lived, I’ll never be able to repay her for the way that her very concrete existence has paved the way for my more luxuriantly abstract one, but that maybe that’s a boundary between us that I’ve been able to cross, and that no matter how many ways I try to explain it in what language, if she’ll fully understand. But I really needed to make sure that, for my own sake, I could know that this did happen, that this was not a figment of my imagination, or that in an hour’s time, or in 12 hours’ time, I would try to minimize it in my own mind.

Thank you very much for your time. We really appreciate it, Jiayang.

Thank you so much for having me.

I’m so sorry that you had the experience you had.

I am, too. But I’m sure it will be a small experience in what is hopefully a very long and a much bigger one of living in America and being American.



We’ll be right back.

Here’s what else you need to know today.

Majority leader.

Our nation continues to battle the coronavirus pandemic. More than 400,000 Americans have tested positive. Nearly 15,000 have lost their lives. And important public health measures are creating an economic catastrophe.

On Thursday, the Labor Department said that another 6.6 million Americans filed for unemployment benefits in the past week.

That means. Mr. President, more than 16 million Americans have lost their jobs in only the last three weeks, a tragedy that is hard to even comprehend.

Economists now believe that the U.S. unemployment rate is the worst since the Great Depression. The latest figures put even deeper pressure on Congress to adopt a new round of economic relief for workers. But on Thursday, that legislation hit a roadblock in the Senate. Democrats want to double the size of the bill by adding hundreds of billions of dollars for hospitals and local governments, which are facing major financial shortfalls.

We don’t have to divide along the usual lines so soon after we came together for the country. To my Democratic colleagues, please, please do not block emergency aid you do not even oppose just because you want something more.

But Republicans, led by Senate Majority leader Mitch McConnell, say that money can wait.

Let’s continue to work together with speed and bipartisanship. We will get through this crisis together.

“The Daily” is made by Theo Balcomb, Andy Mills, Lisa Tobin, Rachel Quester, Lynsea Garrison, Annie Brown, Clare Toeniskoetter, Paige Cowett, Michael Simon Johnson, Brad Fisher, Larissa Anderson, Wendy Dorr, Chris Wood, Jessica Cheung, Stella Tan, Alexandra Leigh Young, Jonathan Wolfe, Lisa Chow, Eric Krupke, Marc Georges, Luke Vander Ploeg, Adizah Eghan, Kelly Prime, Julia Longoria, Sindhu Gnanasambandan, Jazmin Aguilera, M.J. Davis Lin, Austin Mitchell, Sayre Quevedo, Neena Pathak, Dan Powell, Dave Shaw, Sydney Harper, Daniel Guillemette, Hans Buetow, Robert Jimison, Mike Benoit and Bianca Giaever. Special thanks to Sam Dolnick, Mikayla Bouchard, Lauren Jackson, Julia Simon, Nora Keller, Mahima Chablani, Sabrina Tavernise, Yowei Shaw and Adriana Balsamo.

That’s it for “The Daily.” I’m Michael Barbaro. See you on Monday.

For American-born Asians, there is a sudden sense of being watched that is as unsettling as it is unfamiliar.

“It’s a look of disdain,” said Chil Kong, a Korean-American theater director in Maryland. “It’s just: ‘How dare you exist in my world? You are a reminder of this disease, and you don’t belong in my world.’”

He added: “It’s especially hard when you grow up here and expect this world to be yours equally. But we do not live in that world anymore. That world does not exist.”

One debate among Asian-Americans has been over whether to wear a mask in public. Wearing one risks drawing unwanted attention; but not wearing one does, too. Ms. Zhu said her parents, who live in China, offered to ship her some.

“I’m like, ‘Oh please, don’t,’” she said. She said she was afraid of getting physically attacked if she wore one. “Lots of my friends, their social media posts are all about this: We don’t wear masks. It’s kind of more dangerous than the virus.”

A 30-year-old videographer in Syracuse, N.Y., said he was still shaken from a trip to the grocery store last week, when the man ahead of him in the checkout line shouted at him, “It’s you people who brought the disease,” and other customers just stared at him, without offering to help. That same day, he said, two couples verbally abused him at Costco.

“I feel like I’m being invaded by this hatred,” said the man, Edward, who asked that his last name not be used because he feared attracting more attention. “It’s everywhere. It’s silent. It’s as deadly as this disease.”

He said he had tried to hide the details of what happened from his mother, who moved to the United States from China in the 1970s. But there was one thing he did tell her.

“I told her, whatever you do, you can’t go shopping,” he said. “She needed to know there’s a problem and we can’t act like it’s normal anymore.”

<|endoftext|>

NOVATO, Calif. — A climbing destination on the remote eastern side of the snow-capped Sierra Nevada, Bishop, Calif., was packed last weekend, as crowded as any holiday, despite growing calls for isolation in advance of a predicted wave of coronavirus cases.

“People were like, ‘Social distancing? I’m going to Bishop. Can’t get any more distant than that,’” said Jeff Deikis, a resident and climber.

Although the risks of climbing are primarily associated with the heights and terrain, adventurers jammed the coffee shops and the brewery in Bishop. Driving four hours from Los Angeles and six hours from San Francisco, packs of climbers scaled the nearby boulders and canyons, sharing fresh air and, perhaps, infectious disease.

“Climbers from around the country have descended upon Bishop as though a global pandemic were some sort of hall pass from responsibility and magnanimity,” a climbing blog reported.

Across the United States, from Florida beaches to California mountains, casinos to national parks, legions dismissed the growing demands this past week to isolate themselves and stop congregating as the coronavirus spread through the country and shut down nearly all facets of American life.

They were the defiers and the disbelievers. They were those eager to flout authority or those afflicted with cabin fever, if not Covid-19. They were the officials crowded on the podium of the White House briefing room, doing not as they say.

They were all people who dismissed the calls for isolation, seeing more reward than risk in gathering. They conflated confidence with immunity. As in other times of national crisis, they exposed the relationship between individuals and society and our responsibility to others.

“If I get corona, I get corona,” a reveler in Florida said in a widely-shared television interview. “At the end of the day, I’m not going to let it stop me from partying.”

Under pressure, both social and governmental, their numbers shrink by the day. Their impact on spreading the virus may never be known.

The most dismissive were mostly young, freed from the structures of school and work, perhaps new to the concept of social responsibility. But plenty were older, trusting that the dwindling number of places still open to the public could be sanitized enough to keep sickness away.

Some did not want to cancel long-set plans for things like weddings. Others just wanted to get to the outdoors, only to find they were far from alone.

For others, gathering wasn’t a choice. It was a requirement from an employer more afraid of missed revenues than of spreading viruses.

While many grocery stores, gas stations and takeout restaurants remained open, the definition of “essential business” was open to interpretation.

In Rhode Island, among businesses cited for ignoring social-distance warnings was Wonderland, a strip club, where customers were still receiving lap dances last weekend. (Its website says it has since closed temporarily.)

GameStop, the video game chain, drew an outcry from its employees as it instructed its thousands of stores to remain open and to counter closure requests by local authorities, because, according to a staff memo, it believed it was “classified as essential retail.”

In California, Tesla, the luxury electric carmaker, temporarily defied Bay Area orders to shut down all nonessential business, keeping its 10,000 factory workers on the job. On Thursday, Tesla said it would suspend operations, beginning Monday.

And in the Midwest, Uline, a major distributor of packaging materials and industrial supplies, kept its work force going through the week, despite complaints from employees, including those crowded into its call centers, working side-by-side in cubicles.

“Nothing’s really changed,” one employee said. “It’s just nerve-racking.”

Employees received an email Thursday from the Uihlein Family, owners of the $5.8 billion company and big donors to Republican causes, thanking them for their efforts and saying that the “White House called upon us twice with huge orders” this week.

The same day, a manager at one Uline call center sent a note to employees.

“If you, or family members, are under the weather with cold/allergies — or anything aside from Covid-19,” it read, “please do NOT tell your peers about the symptoms & your assumptions. By doing so, you are causing unnecessary panic in the office.”

But plenty of Americans voluntarily ventured into the germ-stained world to pass time. While the major casinos in Las Vegas and Atlantic City shuttered early in the week, those like Chukchansi Gold in central California promised increased cleanliness, a tricky sell in a world of playing cards and slot machines.

They folded, one by one. Chukchansi announced suddenly on Friday that it would close that night. Valley View Casino, near San Diego, planned to make it until Sunday night, but closed on Friday, too, along with several casinos in Florida.

With so many indoor places closed — no malls, no movies — millions tried to escape outdoors, sometimes creating their own crowds. Sidewalks were jammed around the Tidal Basin in Washington, D.C., as people came to see the cherry blossoms.

No place highlighted the country’s conflicting moods more than Florida. Footage of crowded beaches spread. Shutting down spring break proved difficult. Some students, high on sunshine and beers and obliviousness, relied on their youth as a shield and ignored warnings they could carry the virus back to their parents and grandparents.

“It’s like this thing blew up in my face,” said Parker Simms, a student from the University of Kentucky who came to Fort Lauderdale last Saturday with 50 friends and big plans. “It blew up during my spring break week.”

In the debate between economics and epidemiology, local officials generally took the side of money and revelry. Late in the week, though, many joined the shutdown trend.

By Thursday, the beach in Fort Lauderdale was eerily empty, save for stacked chairs and lifeguard towers. A cluster of college students with roller bags and floppy straw hats walked toward a waiting SUV headed to the airport.

Not all beachgoers were young people. A retired doctor and self-described “metal detectorist” named Larry Leguire, 68, from Columbus, Ohio, had been in Florida since December. On Thursday on Clearwater Beach, he found four rings, two of which he believed were gold, plus a handful of coins, aluminum cans, pull tabs and bottle caps.

“It was crazy out here yesterday,” Mr. Leguire said. “You saw it, right? Today is a lot less. I think it’s the coronavirus and the news about all the kids congregating.”

Mr. Leguire said he and his wife keep distance from others and wear gloves and masks in grocery stores. He was not happy to learn that the beach was closing Friday night.

“The beach is my life, and without the beach, it’s like, why be in Florida?” he said. “I might as well go back home and sequester myself in my house in Columbus, Ohio.”

Formal gatherings like funerals and weddings were canceled or reconsidered. At a backyard wedding near Anaheim, Calif., on Saturday night, a DJ named Amanda B. was so nervous about performing that she did not shake the groom’s hand or let anyone touch her microphone.

“At that point, the advice was that gatherings of 50 or less were OK,” she said a few days later. “But I wouldn’t do it now.”

In Brooklyn, Hasidic Jews defied isolation orders and held weddings; others continued gathering for prayer. In Fort Lauderdale, Fla., a wedding planned for late March was expedited and shrunk. Charlotte Jay and Blake Parker, both 29, called their rabbi, invited a dozen close relatives to Mr. Parker’s parents’ condo, and rushed to get ready.

Clorox wipes and hand sanitizer greeted guests on an outdoor terrace. Mr. Parker’s mother played the Beatles’ “All You Need Is Love” on her cellphone. The wedding planner live-streamed the ceremony for the original 225 guests.

“My dad and I sanitized our hands, linked arms and walked down the aisle,” Ms. Jay said. “We didn’t even hug or kiss. My dad elbow bumps Blake. Then he elbow bumps me.”

Others tried to treat these as normal times, though contrasts were easy to spot. California’s Santa Monica Pier was closed, its amusement park quiet and still, but surfers continued riding waves below it.

On Wednesday afternoon in Los Angeles’ Fairfax District, groups of runners dripped sweat on the near empty streets, zooming past day laborers humming corridos. At the Erewhon market a mile away, both the middle-aged and millennials sipped to-go coffees and munched plates of roasted organic carrots and beets at clusters of outdoor tables.

At nearby Pan Pacific Park, basketball players filled a court and CrossFitters heaved kettlebells on the grass. It seemed more leisurely Sunday than mounting global emergency.

Among the unexpected places to see a virus-induced surge in visitors were some national parks. Big Bend National Park, in Texas, had lines of cars a week ago and was “packed” earlier this week, even as isolation orders rolled across the country.

Most national parks waived entrance fees but closed visitors centers. Yosemite National Park was among those to shut down lodging, and on Friday afternoon, closed entirely.

On Saturday, people in the Bay Area ignored stay-in-place orders and crowded outdoor places like the Marin Headlands and Point Reyes National Seashore, which reported “unprecedented visitation.”

Any type of middle-of-nowhere congregation created a new kind of worry — rural areas with limited medical facilities being overrun with tourists just as the pandemic strikes in full. That concern shut down Colorado ski resorts. Islands in Maine and North Carolina barred visitors.

In Moab, Utah, an area known for rock climbing and mountain biking near Arches National Park, health officials shut down hotels to everyone but local residents or those traveling for work after executives from the 17-bed Moab Regional Hospital implored the state to help.

That was the concern in Bishop. The Bishop Area Climbers Coalition ultimately asked “climbing friends” to “not travel to Bishop at this time.”

“We’re worried about what will happen if and when Bishop turns into its own little cluster” of the coronavirus, Deikis, the coalition’s vice president, said on Wednesday.

By Friday, after shops had closed and Gov. Gavin Newsom of California gave a shelter-in-place order, the town was relatively quiet again.

There was no outrunning the effects of the coronavirus, even at the edge of the continent. In Key West, Fla., a red, black and yellow buoy marking the southernmost point in the continental United States is a hot spot for tourists. A line forms every day, all day, for the photo op in front of the buoy that declares “90 Miles to Cuba.”

The buoy was covered this week in a quest to keep tourists from gathering there.

“It’s the southernmost tarp!” one tourist quipped.

Kay Seeling, 69, and two friends made the trip to Florida from Seattle a week ago, not expecting the crisis to follow them, exploding as it did. Now they had few options, as bars and many restaurants closed, and county officials ordered hotels closed by Sunday.

“We’re taking precautions,” Denise Algie, a companion, said, noting her hand sanitizer.

“But we’re not,” Ms. Seeling argued. “We have masks, but we’re not wearing them.”

“You’re going to die of something at our age anyway,” Ms. Algie said. “You can’t stop life.”

They hopped on their rented golf cart and left. Next stop: an airboat ride on the Florida Everglades. They hoped it was still open.

Additional reporting was contributed by Audra Burch and Joseph B. Treaster from Miami; Frances Robles from Key West, Fla.; Amaris Castillo from Tampa, Fla.; Adam Popescu from Los Angeles; and Sapna Maheshwari and Niraj Chokshi from New York.



<|endoftext|>

If you have a fender bender in Nashville these days, chances are you’ll be filing your report by phone. In Philadelphia, the police are trying not to take drug dealers to jail. In Hilton Head, S.C., the authorities have seemed particularly focused on one offense: gathering and drinking on the beach. 

But even that transgression was unlikely to lead to an arrest. Across the country, violators of new rules that require staying at home and keeping your distance from others are most likely to get off with a warning. 

Police departments are treading softly as they navigate the twin demands of the coronavirus pandemic: how and when to enforce the new safety regulations, and how to do their regular work in the midst of a national health emergency.

“This is a very, very stressful time, and we will approach our job with compassion,” said Maj. Bob Bromage of the Beaufort County Sheriff’s Office in South Carolina, where Hilton Head beaches were closed to prevent large congregations of spring break revelers. 

Several police departments in areas under restriction orders, including in the San Francisco Bay Area, have taken an “education over enforcement” approach, preferring to warn people rather than to arrest them. 

“If we see large groups, we’ll go and talk to them, educate them about it and try and get compliance,” Chief Terence Monahan of the New York Police Department told the local news station NY1 before New York State’s stay-at-home order went into effect on Sunday night. 

Much of the coronavirus action has been focused on businesses rather than on people. Police officers in New York City have visited thousands of bars and restaurants with little incident. 

In San Jose, Calif., the police plan to step up enforcement this week, particularly for businesses that have already been warned but have failed to close. 

“We’re not going to stay ‘educational’ for long if people aren’t paying attention to this,” Chief Eddie Garcia said in a news conference on Friday, adding that criminal citations could be issued.

There were glimpses of how much could be at stake. 

A month before the coronavirus outbreak led to orders that tens of millions of Americans largely stay at home, white supremacists had urged each other to spread the virus by filling spray bottles with saliva, spitting on elevator buttons and other ways, intelligence officials said.

The bioterrorism plot was detailed in an unclassified intelligence briefing in late February by the Federal Protective Service, which is part of the Department of Homeland Security. Hate group members used the instant messaging application Telegram to urge each other to weaponize the virus and target law enforcement officers and “nonwhite” communities.

There was no evidence members of hate groups took any of those actions. 

But Jonathan Greenblatt, the chief executive of the Anti-Defamation League, said in an interview Sunday that it’s not surprising that hate groups have been trying to seize on the anxiety and confusion over the coronavirus outbreak.

“I think we’re all in the fog of war trying to understand what the coronavirus will mean for our families, our firms and our society as a whole,” Mr. Greenblatt said.

And sometimes, the virus and traditional police work intersect.

On March 6, police in Portland, received a report of the theft of 20 to 25 cases of N95 respirator masks, each case containing 400 masks. The next day, the theft victim discovered someone selling what seemed to be the same masks on Craigslist. A 22-year-old man was arrested on theft charges, eventually 13 boxes of the masks were recovered, and the theft victim donated all the masks to local hospitals for dealing with the coronavirus, police said. 

Still, across the country there have been few arrests so far related to the coronavirus. That was in stark contrast to the stringent approach of police forces abroad. 

In Jordan, 400 people were arrested after violating a nationwide curfew introduced on Saturday. A 26-year-old man was arrested on the Isle of Man, in the Irish Sea, after “failing to self-isolate.” He faces a possible fine of up to 10,000 pounds (about $11,500) and prison. As of Friday, more than 31,000 people in Spain had been reported for not abiding by stay-at-home rules, according to the country’s Interior Minister, Fernando Grande Marlaska.

In the United States, where many police departments have struggled to build trust after decades of aggressive and often discriminatory tactics like “stop and frisk,” departments in cities like Chicago have cautioned officers not to use stay-at-home orders as a pretext to stop residents. 

In San Jose, a memo went out saying the orders could not be used for vehicle or pedestrian stops. “We’re going to be the ones holding the bag in terms of rebuilding community trust, if we’re not mindful of exercising discretion with these orders,” Chief Garcia said in a phone interview.

The orders include many exceptions and legitimate reasons that people can be outside, which include grocery shopping, exercising and walking the dog. Although violating public health directives carries a penalty in many places, officials have yet to put in place strict laws around self-isolation. 

Not all behavior gets a pass.

On Wednesday, a man in North Carolina was arrested after claiming to have the coronavirus while live-streaming on Facebook inside a Walmart. The police charged him with felony perpetrating a hoax in a public building and disorderly conduct. A week earlier, authorities in East Texas arrested a man on a misdemeanor charge after he falsely claimed he had tested positive for the virus.

National Guard troops have been activated in all 50 states and several U.S. territories to help deal with the outbreak, but generally not for law enforcement duties. Rather, they are assisting with logistics — distributing supplies, setting up and operating testing sites, cleaning and securing public buildings — and other urgent work.

Some police departments warned that they will start enforcing rules against large gatherings, and pleaded with the public to heed such bans because they put the officers who respond at risk along with everyone else. 

They have also closed police substations, service windows and lobbies, and cut down on the number of calls to which they respond. 

“Departments are triaging crime,” said Chuck Wexler, the executive director of the Police Executive Research Forum, who is in regular contact with police officials nationwide. “The general guideline is to avoid arresting someone unless it’s absolutely necessary.” 

The point is to reduce the number of people confined in jails, which have become public health hazards, and to minimize officer contact with the public. Boston, Denver, Los Angeles and Miami all are showing a reduction in arrests, Mr. Wexler said. 

Part of the reason is likely a drop in calls for help, which several departments have reported. In North Carolina, the Asheboro Police Department has seen a 40 percent decrease in calls, according to Chief Mark Lineberry.

And police departments are dealing with their own growing health issues. The New York Police Department said on Sunday it had 98 confirmed cases of the virus: 70 uniformed officers and 28 civilian employees. Three are hospitalized. Officers have been calling out sick at nearly twice the normal rate since about March 17, officials said. 

In Detroit, five officers have tested positive and more than 150 more have been quarantined. Officers have tested positive in Atlanta, Boston and Los Angeles, according to news reports. 

In Bellevue, Wash., dispatchers are screening callers to see if they have symptoms or may have been exposed to the virus. If the answer is yes, officers ask to meet them outside and may be wearing gowns, gloves and masks, Chief Steve Mylett said. 

But those supplies are running out. “We’re probably good for another week or two, then we’re going to be out,” he said. 

Then what?

“That’s the question, then what?”

Chief Mylett ticked off a number of other concerns on the minds of officers: 

A surge in gun purchases and applications for concealed weapon permits.

An increase in hate crimes — about a third of the population in Bellevue is Asian, and many say they have already experienced retaliation, he said. 

An uptick in domestic violence incidents if the strain of home confinement under tough financial circumstances becomes too great.

Potential civil unrest. 

“The thing that police officers hate more than anything else is the unknown, but we have to prepare for the unknown,” he said. “I’m concerned that this is the calm before the storm.”











<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — President Trump’s refusal to invoke the Defense Production Act to commandeer resources for the federal government is based on a bet that he can cajole the nation’s biggest manufacturers and tech firms to come together in a market-driven, if chaotic, consortium that will deliver critical equipment — from masks to ventilators — in time to abate a national crisis.

Over the past five days, after weeks of minimizing the virus and dismissing calls to organize a national response, administration officials have been pulling executives into the White House Situation Room, and connecting them by phone, in a desperate effort to unlock existing supplies and ramp up new production.

Rear Adm. John Polowczyk has been plucked from the staff of the Joint Chiefs, where he is a senior officer for military logistics, to run the effort to build a supply chain. And Peter Navarro, the White House trade adviser, is also playing a leading role. The government has essentially thrown out its existing playbook for dealing with pandemics, seizing the issue from the Department of Health and Human Services and moving it to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

But it is far from clear that the effort to enlist companies like General Motors, Apple and Hanes, just a few of the firms that have promised to free up existing supplies of masks or repurpose 3-D printers to produce ventilator parts, constitutes an effective strategy.

In interviews with participants in the process, from business executives to government officials, there is still widespread confusion about how much and what exactly each firm is supposed to produce. Corporate executives say they face a bewildering number of requests from dozens of nations around the world, along with governors and mayors around the country, for scarce supplies. The White House has not said who will set the priority list for deliveries. And it is not clear that any of it will arrive in time for the cities and the states that are hit the hardest, including New York.

Yet, in declining to actually make use of the Korean War-era production act that he invoked last week, Mr. Trump is also avoiding taking personal responsibility for how fast the acute shortages of personal protective gear and lifesaving equipment are addressed.

On Sunday, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York made a public appeal for the federal government to take over the distribution of critical goods, arguing that Mr. Trump’s insistence last week that states should find the medical equipment for themselves was turning into a senseless free-for-all.

“Don’t get into this mad bidding war,” Mr. Cuomo said, noting that the federal reticence was resulting in huge price surges, hoarding and shortages in some of the hardest-hit locales, including New York City.

Only the federal government can require private firms to shift their production, Mr. Cuomo said. “If I had the power, I would do it in New York,” he said.

Yet as that debate has played out in the White House Situation Room, Mr. Trump’s son-in-law, Jared Kushner, has thrown out the established government plan for dealing with pandemics, after concluding it was insufficient because it never envisioned a pandemic of this breadth.

Mr. Kushner and other aides concluded that only FEMA had what they internally called the “battle rhythm” to be the lead agency. But although the agency has experience cleaning up after tornadoes and hauling in trailers for temporary housing, “it likely won’t know a thing about medical supply chains and devices,” said Christopher Kirchhoff, who examined the capabilities of each government agency for the Obama administration and wrote a detailed report of its shortcomings in dealing with the H1N1 swine flu virus, and then Ebola.

While FEMA knows how to issue contracts rapidly and move goods, it is important not to “divorce the expertise from the execution,” Mr. Kirchhoff said.

On Sunday, the FEMA administrator, Peter T. Gaynor, an experienced emergency manager, was unable to say how many face masks had been shipped from national stockpiles, or how many had been ordered. “I can’t give you a rough number; I can tell you it is happening every day,” he said. That led Mr. Trump, in a late afternoon news conference, to begin to announce specific figures.

To Mr. Trump’s critics, the core problem is not the effort now underway, but the failure to address the issue over the past three years, after government-run simulations, including one code-named Crimson Contagion, revealed some of the huge vulnerabilities.

Mr. Trump’s likely opponent in the coming presidential election, former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., said the administration’s effort was coming too late.

“Now a tragic and inescapable truth is clear: Even though the senior-most medical and intelligence experts in the United States government were sounding the alarm about coronavirus for months, President Trump neglected, minimized and lied about this virus,” Mr. Biden said in a statement. “He failed to expeditiously get us enough tests, respirators, ventilators and other vital equipment when his peers in other countries did their duty and stood up for their people.”

Administration officials, asked why they have been reluctant to use the full force of the Defense Production Act to press industry into action, say the country is not in such dire straits. There is plenty of volunteer cooperation, they say, and there is always the implicit threat of ordering mandatory measures if they do not. Mr. Trump, at the news briefing, suggested an ideological concern as well. “We’re a country not based on nationalizing our business,” he said.

At the briefing, Mr. Navarro said, “We’re getting what we need without putting the heavy hand of government down.”

In an interview, Mr. Navarro said the administration would not hesitate to use its powers in certain situations. For example, he said, some brokers had been hoarding supplies of masks in warehouses and trying to sell them at exorbitant prices.

“That’s a Defense Production Act action waiting to happen,” he said. “If anybody thinks they’re going to sit on urgently needed supplies and profiteer from this crisis, they’re going to answer to the full force of the Trump administration.”

The U.S. Chamber of Commerce and the heads of major corporations have lobbied the administration against using the act. They say the move could prove counterproductive, imposing red tape on companies precisely when they need flexibility to deal with closed borders and shuttered factories.

Mr. Trump and the director of his national economic council, Larry Kudlow, as well as Mr. Kushner, were persuaded by those arguments, administration officials said.

Mr. Navarro has been coordinating with companies including FedEx, Hanes, Pernod Ricard and Honeywell to try to alleviate bottlenecks in the supply chain. Last week, he sent a cargo aircraft to Italy to fetch 800,000 nasal swabs for coronavirus testing, and pieced together a coalition of fabric companies to manufacture face masks out of underwear material. On Monday, FEMA was set to airlift 3,000 Tyvek suits, 19,000 masks and 75,000 pairs of gloves from United Technologies to New York, Washington and California, Mr. Navarro said.

Anderson Warlick, the chief executive of the textile company Parkdale Mills, said Mr. Navarro had called him early last week to ask what the company could make. By Saturday, Parkdale Mills joined Hanes, Fruit of the Loom and other companies in announcing a coalition to produce masks.

But they are not the kind hospitals most need. The new masks will be made of a three-ply underwear fabric, and do not provide the level of protection given by the N95 masks that health care workers need for intubation and other procedures.

“It’s not something you’re going to wear in the operating room,” Mr. Warlick said of the companies’ mask. “But you’ve got people out there today — it’s kind of pitiful — wearing bandannas and everything else.”

While the corporate announcements, like Apple’s move to donate millions of masks, may have generated some positive headlines for the Trump administration, critics say the ad hoc approach is falling far short of the challenge.

Industry executives say companies are reluctant to crank up production lines without purchasing guarantees from the government. With the economy in free-fall and factories shuttering around the country, few manufacturers are eager to invest in new machinery or venture into new products.

American companies that manufacture face masks, medical wipes and other supplies are already operating around the clock to meet elevated demand.

Among them, 3M has said it will increase its global production capacity by a third in the next year, but that falls far short of the current need. Honeywell is adding production for N95 masks globally, and General Electric said it was hiring more workers and adding shifts to produce more ventilators.

Factories that make diapers, wipes and similar products have also switched over to manufacture the raw material that goes into N95 masks.

To make that material, industry executives said, it would most likely take three to five months to obtain and install the necessary equipment and begin production.

Similar questions loom about ventilator production. The White House has highlighted promises by Ford, General Motors and Tesla to make the machines, but analysts said it could take many months for companies to create a product that would be approved as safe by regulators.

“Ford, General Motors and Tesla are being given the go ahead to make ventilators and other metal products, FAST!” the president tweeted Sunday morning.

Both General Motors and Ford have declined to say how quickly they might produce ventilators; they have never done it before. A spokeswoman for Ford said the company was still assessing the possibility of producing ventilators.

General Motors said in a statement that it was working with Ventec Life Systems, which already makes ventilators, to help it rapidly scale up its production, using GM’s logistics, purchasing and manufacturing expertise.

Carla Bailo, the president of the Center for Automotive Research, said the auto companies could use their 3-D printing capabilities to produce some parts of a ventilator fairly quickly, and then turn to their extensive network of automotive suppliers for other components, like electronics and hoses.

Ms. Bailo estimated that such cooperation might yield a product in as little as three to six weeks, though it would still need regulatory approval.

David E. Sanger and Ana Swanson reported from Washington, and Maggie Haberman from New York. Chris Cameron contributed reporting from Washington.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — With the economy faltering and the political landscape unsettled as the coronavirus death toll climbs, a stark and unavoidable question now confronts President Trump and his advisers: Can he save his campaign for re-election when so much is suddenly going so wrong?

After three years of Republicans’ championing signs of financial prosperity that were to be Mr. Trump’s chief re-election argument, the president has never needed a new message to voters as he does now, not to mention luck. At this point, the president has one clear option for how to proceed politically, and is hoping that an array of factors will break his way.

The option, which he has brazenly pushed in recent days, is to cast himself as a “wartime president” who looks in charge of a nation under siege while his likely Democratic opponent, former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., is largely out of sight hunkered down in Delaware. This gambit, however, requires a rewriting of history — Mr. Trump’s muted approach to the virus early on — and it’s far from clear if many voters will accept the idea of him as a wartime leader.

Then there are other variables that he and his allies hope will fall in their favor: that the outbreak of the virus will slow and, in the warmer months, dissipate; that the states will get it under control; that the federal government’s steps taken so far will flatten the curve; that Mr. Biden and the Democrats will look impotent and inconsequential by comparison; and that enough voters will move past his initial efforts to play down the virus’s dangers.

The great unknown, of course — and the tremendous risk to Mr. Trump’s political fate, no matter what he says or does — is that the human cost, the economic toll, and the longevity and course of the pandemic are all X factors that will most likely play out for months and could be strongly salient if not severe by the time of the November general election.

In perhaps the best-case scenario for Mr. Trump, the patina of a “wartime president” could prove to be influential with casual voters who don’t dig into the details of his belated response to the coronavirus, which included dismissing the criticism of his handling of the threat as a Democratic “hoax” and contributing to a slow start in testing for the virus.

“He is counting on people being so traumatized on a day-to-day basis that they will forget his inaction,” said Douglas Brinkley, a professor of history at Rice University. “It’s better for him to be a wartime commander in chief than someone who, when the big crisis hit, misread it completely.”

Politically, Mr. Brinkley said, the new posture made sense. “He can claim credit for the curve flattening at some point,” he said, “and hope people will be afraid to push a leader out of office if the crisis pushes into the fall.”

The president’s course correction showed some quick results that were seized on by his political advisers. An ABC News poll released last week showed that 55 percent of Americans approved of Mr. Trump’s response to the pandemic, up from 43 percent the week before.

Rarely have incumbent presidents seen their arguments for re-election evaporate so quickly. Mr. Trump and his advisers had planned to argue that the strong economy warranted a second term and that supporters and detractors alike wanted their 401(k)’s in the Trump-era stock market; that has now become an impossible sell. And as the administration negotiates an enormous bailout package with Congress for multiple industries, his strategy of caricaturing Democrats as “socialists” is not tenable either.

So Mr. Trump is trying to mount a new version of his old argument: that “I alone can fix it,” as he said at the 2016 Republican convention about the nation’s problems. He is counting on enough voters believing they have to stick by a leader in the midst of an immense global crisis.

Addressing fearful Americans, Mr. Trump said on Sunday evening: “You have a leader that will always fight for you and I will not stop until we win. This is going to be a victory.” He added at another point, “No American is alone as long as we’re united.”

But shortly after reading his new script on Sunday night, Mr. Trump mocked Senator Mitt Romney of Utah for self-quarantining. “Romney’s in isolation? Gee, that’s too bad,” he said sarcastically at the briefing room podium.

Mr. Trump is on uncertain political ground. His poll numbers in critical swing states like Pennsylvania and Michigan have been wavering, with most surveys showing him behind Mr. Biden and Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont.

Republican officials are banking on voters seeing him as take-charge in contrast to Mr. Biden and Mr. Sanders, who have been following the government’s guidance about staying indoors but have not yet found memorable ways to show how they would lead in this crisis.

Mr. Biden and Mr. Sanders have held news conferences from remote locations, and Mr. Biden has participated in “virtual” fund-raisers. While Mr. Biden has an all but insurmountable lead in the race for the Democratic nomination, he has no real ability to steer events because he is not officially the presumptive nominee, and therefore is not the head of the party either.

As a result, Mr. Biden finds himself with far fewer options than Mr. Trump or Democratic governors like Andrew M. Cuomo of New York, who have real authority and are holding news conferences often broadcast live.

In turn, Republican officials and Sanders allies are pushing out attacks on Mr. Biden’s low profile, asking “Where’s Joe?” in emails to supporters and the news media. (A spokesman, T.J. Ducklo, said Sunday that Mr. Biden had not been tested for the virus because he had shown no symptoms.)

transcript

From The New York Times, I’m Michael Barbaro. This is “The Daily.”



Last week, President Trump sounded newly serious about combating the coronavirus, calling himself a quote, “wartime president.” Maggie Haberman on why days later, and with the situation only worsening, the president is abandoning that message.

It’s Wednesday, March 25.

Hello, guys.

Hi.

Hi.

Maggie, it is Tuesday afternoon. Can you tell us about what just happened on the Fox News Channel?

Over the next two hours, the president, the vice president, and the officials tasked with leading our nation’s response on the virus pandemic will join us to answer your questions all across America.

We just saw Vice President Mike Pence and President Trump sit for two hours at a town hall meeting — virtual town hall meeting — with Fox News from the White House, where they took questions by remote.

I think a lot of us right now are just wondering, what is the potential for a national stay-at-home order? Is this something that America could be seeing in our near future?

Pence answered a bunch of questions first.

Carly, I can tell you that at no point has the White House coronavirus task force discussed what some people call a nationwide lockdown.

Then, President Trump came on for the second hour.

Our people are full of vim and vigor and energy. They don’t want to be locked into a house or an apartment or some space. It’s not for our country. We’re not — we’re not built that way.

And his message was even louder of a message that he’s been delivering for the last day or so, which is that while we have to take the coronavirus seriously —

You know, I don’t want the cure to be worse than the problem itself.

— in his words, the cure can’t be worse than the disease.

— the problem being, obviously, the problem. And you know, you can destroy a country this way by closing it down.

And by that, he means that the hits to the economy are becoming unsustainable. That it can’t go on forever.

You’re going to lose people. You’re going to have suicides by the thousands. You’re going to have all sorts of things happen. You’re going to have instability. You can’t just come in and say, let’s close up the United States of America, the biggest, the most successful country in the world by far.

And then he broke some news.

I’d love to have it open by Easter. OK? I would love to have it open by Easter.

Oh wow, OK.

And that news was that he believes that by April 12, which is Easter, that that could be when the country and its economy are reopened.

It’s such an important day for other reasons, but I’ll make it an important day for this, too. I would love to have the country opened up and just raring to go by Easter.

Maggie, this seems very much at odds with the messaging coming from more local leaders and health officials in the areas of the U.S. that have been most directly hit by this pandemic so far. I’m thinking, for example, of the governor of New York, Andrew Cuomo, who was warning New York residents —

Look, this can go on for several months, OK?

— that they should be preparing for four, six —

— eight months, nine months.

Nine months of life under isolation and shutdown to fight the coronavirus.

Michael, about half an hour or so before Mike Pence started this town hall —

You have 20,000 ventilators in the stockpile. Release the ventilators to New York.

— Andrew Cuomo was pleading with the federal government to send more resources, especially ventilators, because the number of cases that are severe in New York is growing and keeps getting bigger and bigger. And it is outpacing the number of materials that they have for doctors to treat them.

I need the ventilators in 14 days. Only the federal government has that power.

You have health officials in New York, health officials in California, health officials in President Trump’s own government saying we are not just a mere two or three weeks away from things going back to normal. And they’re basing that not just on idle projections, but watching what those curves have looked like in terms of the spread of the virus.

Also, Maggie, help us understand how we got here and why this is the message from the president at this critical moment — when how we respond, what measures we take, and how long we take those measures really matters. And so I wonder where you think that starts. Where do we begin to understand that?

Michael, you need to go back to January 22 when the president was in Davos for the World Economic Forum.

It’s great to see you. Thank you for joining us again in Davos. We’ve done this before.

That’s right.

And he did an interview with CNBC. And at that point, the virus was already in the U.S.

The C.D.C. has identified a case of coronavirus in Washington state.

And he was asked by the interviewer if he was concerned that this could become a pandemic.

Have you been briefed by the C.D.C.?

I have.

Are there worries about a pandemic at this point?

No, we’re not at all.

And the president’s response was, no, not at all.

It’s one person coming in from China, and we have it under control. It’s going to be just fine.

OK.

He didn’t want to talk about it publicly at the time.

And why do you think that was?

Well, according to a number of people who were in contact with him, it was because he didn’t want to rattle the financial markets. That he was hoping that it was going to stay under control, and the stock markets are his political weathervane, and he thinks they need to stay up in order for him to win re-election. And he didn’t want to do anything to disturb that. And he didn’t want to create a panic.

OK. So what happened next?

So after that, a couple of days later, as there were more cases and it was clear that it was spreading out of China — where it originated — the president took this move that he was widely criticized for by Democrats and even some Republicans at the time. Which was he halted a number of flights from China into the U.S.

Disney’s closed.

Yeah.

Movie theaters are closed. Hospitals being built. I think we’re now up to our eighth case in the United States. How concerned are you?

Well, we pretty much shut it down coming in from China.

The idea was to halt the spread of the disease, keep transmissions to a minimum. He was accused of xenophobia. He was accused of making a racist move. At the end of the day, it was probably effective, because it did actually take a pretty aggressive measure against the spread of the virus. The problem is, it was one of the last things that he did for several weeks.

Hmm. So the right decision in retrospect, but not accompanied by similar actions that might have contained transmission.

That’s exactly right. In the same way that George W. Bush was criticized for his “Mission Accomplished” banner about Iraq, the president treated that moment as if it was his mission accomplished moment. He did not do anything after that in terms of alerting the public, or telling people to be safe, or telling people to take precautions. And it basically squandered several weeks within the U.S.

Right. Looking back at the timeline, we can now see that on the same day that the president stopped those flights from China, the coronavirus was already being reported by the W.H.O. in Japan and South Korea, and those countries are still sending their citizens to the United States on flights that have not been stopped. So the horse is out of the barn.

Exactly. It was not anything close to a “whole-of-government approach.” And at that point, there was a task force that was formed, and it was being led by the health and human services secretary, Alex Azar. But it was outside of the White House, and it was rife with all kinds of turf battles. And the president, meanwhile, was still trying not to talk about it.

And succeeding in that, for the most part.

And succeeding in that, for the most part. It was not something that came up in interviews that he did, which were mostly with friendly interviewers who weren’t going to ask him things that he didn’t want to talk about. And look, it’s not as if it wasn’t getting news coverage. The New York Times had it on the front page almost every day from the end of January. It was very clear that this was a global crisis, but it was not being treated as an American crisis. And I think a lot of that is because the president just was not talking about it.

And do we know what information the president is receiving during this time? Is he getting a bunch of briefings — one would think he would be — that are conveying the seriousness of the approaching situation?

There’s conflicting information, Michael, about exactly how specific and how alarmed the briefing materials the president was receiving were at this time. We understand that a lot of folks in the National Security Council were taking it very seriously, and that information had been passed to him. We understand that Alex Azar, the health and human services secretary, took it very seriously, but it’s not clear that he was sharing all of that with the president or that he was being allowed to tell it to the president. There were some people in the White House who viewed Alex Azar in particular as quote-unquote “alarmist” — thought that he was overstating the threat. And when the president doesn’t want to take something particularly seriously, he’ll often poll test advisers until he finds the one who agrees with him that he shouldn’t take it seriously. And I have every reason to believe that he was looking for people to affirm his sense that this didn’t really need to be addressed. And one of the places that he would go to hear his own thoughts affirmed or for solace was Fox News.

If you’ve ever had a question whether the mainstream media distorts, whips up, throw things out of focus or has an agenda, especially when it comes to the Trump administration, look no further than coronavirus.

They were very much echoing what he believed and wanted to believe, which was that the criticisms about inactivity that he wasn’t doing enough was all part of an effort to harm him.

This is yet another attempt to impeach the president. And sadly, it seems they care very little for any of the destruction they are leaving in their wake — losses in the stock market. All this, unfortunately, just part of the political casualties for them.



At this point, the president is in India being fitted by Prime Minister Modi, and public health officials start basically taking matters into their own hands. They start giving public warnings. One top health expert gave a press briefing where she said that —

Now, it’s not so much a question of if this will happen anymore, but rather more a question of exactly when this will happen.

It was no longer a question of if the virus would spread in the United States, but when.

And how many people in this country will become infected, and how many of those will develop severe or more complicated disease.

And that hospitals and businesses and schools should start making preparations accordingly.

Right.

This was as the president was now on his way back from India, and the stock market reacted terribly to these warnings. And the president was furious. He called the health and human services secretary, saying that the remarks had rattled people. He called one of his top economic advisers, Larry Kudlow, wondering what could be done to stop the slide. But at this point, as angry as the president was, it was clear to him and to his advisers that this was no longer something he could ignore.



We’ll be right back.

So Maggie, what happens once the president recognizes that this is something that has to be addressed?

The president put Vice President Mike Pence in charge of the task force.

Good afternoon. We just completed today’s lengthy meeting of the White House coronavirus task force.

And that was a big moment, because this task force that had been kind of diffuse and fighting with itself was for the first time being run from the White House. And it was meant to signal that the president was taking this seriously. So Mike Pence had control of this thing for basically two weeks. And during that time —

We’re continuing to lean into this effort in full partnership with state and local health authorities around the country —

— he was trying to communicate that they were working on a plan —

— to ensure that we do everything to prevent the spread of the disease.

To address the spread, that they were working on guidelines, that they were aware of problems with testing for this virus that have plagued this administration for weeks.

To mitigate its expansion and to provide necessary treatment to Americans that have been impacted.

And after two weeks, Vice President Mike Pence was getting a lot of praise for his demeanor in these briefings.

If I may, we’ll be back here every day. Get used to seeing us. We’re going to bring the experts in. We’re going to make sure and give you the best and most high quality, real time information from the best people in the world. So thank you all for being here.

Thank you. You’re welcome back any time.

And that became a point of concern for some of President Trump’s own advisers, who didn’t want to see Mike Pence get all of the attention.

Huh. So the people around the president didn’t want the vice resident, rather than the president, to be the one seen as quarterbacking this major national crisis?

That’s right. There was concern among the president’s top advisers that it would look as if Vice President Pence was basically doing the job the president should be doing — calming a nation, giving out accurate information, sounding as if he’s in charge. And that led to this idea that the president should give an Oval Office address. So on March 11, the same day the W.H.O. declared the coronavirus a global pandemic, President Trump sat in the Oval Office behind the Resolute Desk at 9 p.m., and the klieg lights came on and the teleprompter started rolling. And he gave an address to the nation.

My fellow Americans, tonight I want to speak with you about our nation’s unprecedented response to the coronavirus outbreak that started in China and is now spreading throughout the world.

For the first time, he acknowledged that this could impact older people.

The highest risk is for elderly population with underlying health conditions. The elderly population must be very, very careful.

He talked about a ban on most travel from Europe.

To keep new cases from entering our shores, we will be suspending all travel from Europe to the United States for the next 30 days. The new rules will go into effect Friday at midnight.

But the address, which was brief, as Oval Office addresses usually are, was seen as a disaster.

Why?

The President looked uncomfortable. He stumbled over the teleprompter, which he never does well with.

I am confident that by counting and continuing to take these tough measures, we will —

And it was riddled with errors, including about the travel ban.

— and these prohibitions will not only apply to the tremendous amount of trade in cargo, but various other things as we get approval.

He suggested that it would apply to cargo and trade. It didn’t, and those mistakes sent the stock markets plummeting.

Right. And my assumption was that the President hoped the speech would do the exact opposite, which is it would give confidence to the stock market and send it back up.

That’s right. The markets continued to tank over the next couple of days. And aides started realizing that there had to be a major course correction or the presidency could be threatened. And the President realized this too. So on March 17 —

I would like to begin by announcing some important developments in our war against the Chinese virus.

— we saw a pretty different tone from President Trump as he talked about this virus.

We’ll be invoking the Defense Production Act just in case we need it. Last week, I signed an emergency declaration under the Stafford Act.

He described it soberly. He suddenly seemed willing to answer questions without being combative.

Do you consider America to be on a wartime footing in terms of fighting this virus?

I do. I actually do. I’m looking at it that way, because you know —

He described himself as a wartime president. He seemed to be taking this seriously in all of the ways that a nation usually looks for a leader to take such a crisis seriously.

It’s a very tough situation, here. You have to do things. You have to close parts of an economy that six weeks ago were the best they’ve ever been. We had the best economy we’ve ever had. And then one day you have to close it down in order to defeat this enemy. But we’re doing it, and we’re doing it well. And I’d say the American people have been incredible.

This was dramatically different from what we had heard just a few days earlier.

Well, so, Maggie, how then do we get to today, where one week later, the situation with this pandemic has only gotten dramatically worse? The virus is exploding in places like New York. The number of infections and deaths are rising across the country. And yet, the president’s message has now kind of reverted back to where it was weeks and weeks ago. His language has changed. His overall comportment and the words he’s using — they’ve all kind of returned to a period where he was not taking this as seriously.

There have been people in the President’s circle who, this entire time, even as the President changed his tone, still thought that some of the moves that the government was making were too aggressive. And those aides started, late last week, talking about the fact that they might want to revisit some of these guidelines and ease up on some of them for targeted groups after this initial 15-day period had ended, which is going to be March 30th. The president started getting the message in earnest on Sunday night that this is something that he needed to worry about. That there might not be an economy to return to once the country was fully back to normal. And so he tweeted on Sunday night that the cure couldn’t be worse than the disease. And that was the beginning of a massive shift of the federal government, which had moved toward aggressive measures to mitigate this virus and its spread, to suddenly suggesting that they could see the end nearing.



We can’t lose a Boeing. And we can’t lose some of these companies. And companies — frankly, Bill — that were solid as, like, AAA companies. Because of what’s happened over the last couple of weeks, they go from AAA to being, like, they could use a hand.

Tough time.

We can’t — you’re right. We can’t lose those companies. If we lose those companies, were talking about hundreds of thousands of jobs, millions of jobs. The faster we go back, the better it’s going to be. We have a pent-up energy that’s going to be unbelievable.

Is there a meaningful contingency of conservative leaders, thinkers, and politicians, economists even, people in business who feel this way, who feel like there’s been an overreaction to this virus in the form of shutting down the American economy?

There are. Some of them are people who have been the president’s advisers on and off for a while, like Stephen Moore of FreedomWorks, who’s an economist and who advised the president at various points. He wrote an op-ed for The Wall Street Journal with Art Laffer, who the president gave the Medal of Freedom to not that long ago. And in that op-ed, they said, essentially, that the government can’t sustain this. That the economy can’t sustain this. And that there needs to be less draconian moves made to keep people safe but still allow the country to run.

Mm-hmm.

There is no public health expert in the government telling the president that these moves are too severe. There is no public health expert in the government telling the president that the curve is about to let up on the spread of the virus. Everything the president has done about this virus has been a reaction to something, and right now he is reacting to pressure to reopen portions of the economy, as the job losses are facing potential millions by April.

You know, I don’t know whether the President would frame it this way, but I wonder if he’s forcing all of us to reckon with what is the ultimate moral dilemma of this pandemic, which is what economic and social cost we’re willing to pay to save some uncertain number of lives. And he seems to be saying, in effect, I’m willing to take the risk that a certain number of Americans will get sick and will die for the greater economic good and health of the United States.

I mean, think of it. We average 36,000 people — death, death. I’m not talking about cases, I’m talking about death. 36,000 deaths a year. People die, 36 — from the flu. But we’ve never closed down the country for the flu. So you say to yourself, what is this all about? Now —

How did you —

It’s never been done.

How did you process that?

Not good. I wasn’t happy about it.

Michael, I think that’s very much what he’s saying. And in fairness to him, Governor Cuomo has openly voiced the same moral dilemma that he is wrestling with. It’s just that Governor Cuomo came down on the other side of it, which was that there is no cost that can be put on human life.

Yeah, my mother is not expendable. And your mother is not expendable. And our brothers and sisters they’re not expendable. And we’re not going to accept a premise that human life is disposable. And we’re not going to put a dollar figure on human life. The first order of business is save lives, period. Whatever it costs.

New York has been, as we know, much harder hit than most of the rest of the country. Most of the rest of the country has not had to go through what New York is going through right now with surges in hospital stays and a number of sick people. The president says most of the country agrees with him, and maybe that’s why.

 But the president is taking a really large gamble, and going with his gut, that the greater good will be served for the rest of the country by trying to preserve the economic health of the country more quickly than his health experts would like him to.

Maggie, thank you very much.

Michael, thank you.

On Tuesday night, Dr. Anthony Fauci, an infectious disease specialist and an influential member of the president’s coronavirus task force, was asked about the president’s plan to reopen the U.S. economy by Easter.

Where are you now with this timeline of 19 days from now?

So that’s really very flexible. We just had a conversation with the president in the Oval Office talking about, you know, you can look at a date, but you’ve got to be very flexible. On a literally day-by-day and week-by-week basis, you need to evaluate the feasibility of what you’re trying to do.

With the president standing beside him, Fauci said it would be foolhardy to ease restrictions if major parts of the country were still in the throes of the pandemic.

Obviously, no one is going to want to tone down things when you see what’s going on in a place like New York City. I mean, that’s just, you know, good public health practice and common sense.



We’ll be right back.

Here’s what else you need to know today.

[SPEAKING HINDI]

Nationwide lockdowns over the virus continued on Tuesday with India becoming the latest and largest country to require citizens to remain indoors, in India’s case, for the next 21 days.

[SPEAKING HINDI]

In a televised speech, Prime Minister Narendra Modi told Indians, quote, “If you can’t handle these 21 days, this country will go back 21 years.” And in the United States, Senate leaders said they were nearing a deal on a historic $2 trillion stimulus bill after days of objections from Democrats over who would monitor billions of dollars in loans to American businesses.

We’ve been fighting very hard that any bailout fund — money to industries that have trouble — have real oversight and transparency. That’s vitally important.

On Tuesday, Democrats said they had persuaded Republicans and the Trump administration to allow an independent inspector and a congressional oversight board to scrutinize the loans, and were almost ready to support the bill.

I hope, I pray, that we can come together very quickly and pass in large numbers a bipartisan bill that will help the American people who so badly, badly, badly need our help.



That’s it for “The Daily.” I’m Michael Barbaro. See you tomorrow.

But the “wartime” strategy also presents risks to Mr. Trump. In his new posture, he is trying to rewrite recent history, erasing his comments from as recently as a week ago when he told Americans that they needed to “just relax” because “it all will pass.” It is also undercut by his resistance to calls for additional federal action from governors in hard-hit states.

Mr. Trump’s temperament is also dissimilar to “wartime presidents” with whom he is seeking to compare himself. Over the course of his presidency, Mr. Trump has struggled to stick to any bipartisan message, or speak emotionally to the pain and fear of Americans during crisis points like natural disasters or mass shootings.

“That’s why it’s so hard to be a wartime president,” said Michael Beschloss, the historian and author of “Presidents of War.” “Not only are you coming up with a strategy and tactics, but at the same time you have to let Americans know that you know how hard this is for them.”

Mr. Trump, so far, has struggled to feel anyone’s pain, unlike past presidents, while continuing to play out the fights with the news media that enliven his base. Last week, he lashed out at a journalist who had prompted him to explain what his message was to the millions of Americans watching him from home, who felt scared.

The president has also continued to credit his own administration’s response. But Mr. Beschloss added that “part of being a wartime president is being willing to give people bad news,” a job Mr. Trump has mostly left to others.

At the same time, he has been timid of using wartime powers to fight what he has called an “invisible enemy.” Last week, for instance, he resisted invoking the Defense Production Act, a federal law that grants presidents extraordinary powers to force American industries to ensure the availability of critical equipment.

Mr. Trump’s allies are aware that his re-election now hangs almost entirely on how he handles the crisis. And the question is whether he will be seen as President George W. Bush was in the immediate aftermath of the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, when he was widely viewed as bringing the nation together, or if he will be compared to Mr. Bush amid the fallout from Hurricane Katrina, when he tried to minimize a crisis that eventually became too big for him to ignore, and during which Mr. Bush praised cabinet officials even as the federal government bungled the response.

Aides said that how Mr. Trump ends up being perceived would also depend on Mr. Trump’s own disposition during the crisis. It is not clear to them whether he will be able to maintain his focus on the crisis for months, especially as the economic situation worsens. Over the weekend, some Trump advisers weren’t ready to accept the likelihood of jobless claims climbing into the millions by next month.

The White House press secretary, Stephanie Grisham, defended Mr. Trump’s response as apolitical. “While it seems many in the media continue to use every opportunity to destroy this president, the fact remains that he has risen to fight this crisis by taking aggressive historic action to protect the health, wealth and well-being of the American people,” Ms. Grisham said in an email.

Some Democrats, meanwhile, said the mistakes made at the beginning of the response had already colored how Mr. Trump would be remembered both in the history books and at the ballot box in November. “At the end of the day, this will be Katrina with the waters at a much higher level, and lasting a longer time,” said Geoff Garin, a Democratic pollster.

But there is an emerging split in Democratic circles about whether to attack Mr. Trump’s response to the virus in real time, or whether the gravity of the moment calls for a pause in negative political advertising and attacks.

Some of Mr. Trump’s highest-profile political adversaries leading states that have become epicenters of the virus have been striking conciliatory notes as they seek federal assistance. Mr. Cuomo said the president was “fully engaged” on the crisis. Gov. Gavin Newsom, Democrat of California, described a recent phone conversation with Mr. Trump as “a privilege.”

Other antagonists have continued to criticize him. Mayor Bill de Blasio of New York tapped into one of Mr. Trump’s greatest fears when he referred to him on CNN as the “Herbert Hoover of his generation,” comparing him to a president who failed to recognize or take bold actions to stave off the stock market crash of 1929 and the subsequent Great Depression.

The debate about whether to embrace or attack Mr. Trump in a national emergency played out most succinctly on Twitter between David Axelrod and David Plouffe, the two men who led Barack Obama’s presidential campaigns.

Mr. Axelrod said that voters would have plenty of time to judge Mr. Trump’s handling of the coronavirus crisis, “but now doesn’t seem the moment for negative ads.” Mr. Plouffe responded that time was of the essence, and that Democrats couldn’t afford to “disarm” and let Mr. Trump create his own reality.

Veterans of John Kerry’s 2004 campaign said Mr. Biden was in a stronger position against Mr. Trump than they were when they faced an election against Mr. Bush. Back then, Mr. Bush still basked in good will from his performance in the aftermath of the Sept. 11 attacks.

Some Democratic Party officials said a comparison between Mr. Biden and Mr. Trump at a moment of crisis only helped Mr. Biden.

“You can see the contrast between the steady, assured, informed and strong leadership that Vice President Biden has shown and the bungling, chaotic and dishonest start-stop approach that Mr. Trump has shown us since the beginning of this crisis,” said Gilberto Hinojosa, chairman of the Texas Democratic Party.

Thomas Kaplan contributed reporting.

<|endoftext|>

SEATTLE — Shannon Koyano is a 39-year-old single mother living, nervously, in the place where the coronavirus got its first deadly foothold in America.

Like so many Americans now, she has worries. A lot of them.

One of her three children last week came down with a fever and a cough. She has an autoimmune disease, making her especially vulnerable. Six months ago, she invested almost her entire savings to open a gift boutique, called Hella Happy, that was thriving until recreational shopping became a thing of Seattle’s past.

Ms. Koyano is already pretty sure that filing for bankruptcy will be inevitable.

Since she lives in a state where cannabis is legal, she visited her local dispensary this week, hoping to buy some relief. Even that backfired. There were seven people in a small shop and “no one was gloving-up or masked or practicing true social distance,” she said. “I was extra panicky.”

There is more. Ms. Koyano fears that her ex-husband, who shares custody, is not enforcing her rules of hand-washing, hand-sanitizing and near-isolation.

She is also concerned by what appears to be a cavalier attitude among her neighbors, whose children she sees playing in groups at a nearby park when she walks her dogs. And anytime she logs onto the internet, she wonders if she is even worrying about everything she should be worried about. “It’s exhausting,” she said.

Communities around the country are grappling with a range of emotions brought on by the coronavirus pandemic, from anxiety to panic to grief.

But in Washington State, where the U.S. outbreak began and where there have been more than 1,600 confirmed cases and more than 90 deaths, the initial shock has given way to complicated philosophical questions about survival, humanity and the future.

“This is such a unique and rare circumstance in history and in our lives,” said Andrew Fleming, a psychologist who also runs, with his wife, a wedding venue on their farm on San Juan Island, north of Seattle. “In 10 years, in 20 years, in 30 years, we will be asking each other, ‘What did you do during the coronavirus?’ and we will be asking ourselves, ‘How did you respond?’”

Percy Abram, the head of the Bush School, a private school with nearly 700 students in kindergarten through 12th grade, has been able to manage his anxiety through work.

In mid-February, when the number of coronavirus deaths in China was nearing 100, Dr. Abram, 49, and his team began to cancel field trips to China, India, Costa Rica and Morocco, as well as an exchange program with Chinese students. They have since canceled on-campus classes, re-conceived a fund-raiser to raise money for student financial aid into an online auction and worked the phones to make sure the permits to start a construction project in the fall move through the bureaucracy.

The head of a private school is in the business of the future: providing parents with a strategic vision of what their children’s lives could become through education and promising students a path to college and beyond. But all he can do now is try to guide them through the next few weeks.

“All I’ve really known is that the answer to work and to emotional strife has been to work harder and work more,” said Dr. Abram, whose wife, a medical doctor, has stresses of her own. Now he realizes that may not be enough.

“Soon, there is no ‘harder’ and no ‘more,’ and that leaves me with uncertainty I will have to face,” he said. “The city is going to slow down, my meetings will slow down and I will have to slow down and process my emotions.”

A half-marathoner, he has been taking long runs, releasing his tension through sweat and, occasionally, by screaming in the woods where he cannot be heard. He is keeping up with his regular therapy appointments. “That is something that I will not let go of,” he said.

Mental health professionals in Seattle have been overwhelmed with work for the past month, and many are juggling their own concerns with the anxiety of their patients.

Julia Hitch, 40, is a psychologist and a founder of the Seattle Clinic, a practice of 21 therapists. Last week, she saw patients back-to-back, including over the weekend, because of the influx of college students who have returned home after canceled semesters, disoriented and depressed.

This week, she is meeting with patients over video conferencing, working out of the spare bedroom that she and her husband are sharing as a makeshift office.

A big part of her practice is working with patients who have obsessive-compulsive disorder, including some she has worked with for years to overcome ritualistic hand-washing. “For someone who has stopped doing that, now it feels like a huge loss to them to have to go back to these behaviors,” she said.

But Dr. Hitch, who is the mother of 6-year-old twins, is also trying to manage her own anxieties. “I really value showing up fully for my kids and I really value showing up fully for my patients,” she said. “I have moments of panic over how do I manage being a home-school teacher and a mom and psychologist?”

Then there are her parents, who live nearly 3,000 miles away in New York. Last week, as Seattle went into an unofficial lockdown, her folks were carrying on with their normal routines. “They have not been taking this as seriously as they should,” she said. “I fret that something will happen to them and that I won’t be able to get to them.”

She is channeling those feelings into positive experiences created to share with her family. Last week, at a “family date night,” she, her husband and her children got dressed up and had a dinner party. She is also planting a garden with her daughters. “I have a black thumb,” Dr. Hitch said. “But this is something I have always wanted to do. And now there is time.”

For hourly and tip-based wage earners in Seattle’s restaurant industry, the economic realities are already hitting hard. So is the instant loss of the work families that restaurant employees often create.

On Sunday near Pike Place Market, a usually jam-packed tourist area that was all but desolate last weekend, Gretchen Kenney, a bartender at Seatown Market Diner for the past 10 years, faced a last call like none other.

The staff had learned a few days earlier that Tom Douglas, a celebrated owner, was temporarily shuttering 12 of his 13 restaurants citywide, including Seatown, both to slow the spread of the coronavirus and the bleeding of operational costs incurred by empty restaurants.

“Oh, gosh, come here,” said Ms. Kenney, 55, extending her arms, social distance be damned, to embrace a colleague.

It had been a poignant afternoon of drinking and reminiscing for her and the rest of the wait staff, who, in lieu of customers to serve, served themselves. “I feel nostalgic, but I’m not saying goodbye, I’m saying, ‘See you later,’” Ms. Kenney said.

Now, close to 7 p.m. and with the sun setting over Elliott Bay, Seatown’s waiters and bartenders poured outside, lit cigarettes and pondered what is next.

Ms. Kenney is the den-mother of the staff and she said she was mostly worried for her friends and their financial futures. Her husband, David Kenney, a landscaper, stood quietly beside her. “I have a husband with a job. We’ll be OK,” she said. “But it’s sad we won’t see our friends, we won’t see our regulars.” She started to cry. Her husband rubbed her back.

Eight miles north, in Seattle’s Greenwood neighborhood, Chrissy Hettich was holed up in her apartment trying to find the bright side.

A lifelong Seattle resident with a degree in Norwegian and anthropology from the University of Washington, Ms. Hettich, 27, has been working as a bartender for two and a half years at Purple Cafe & Wine Bar, in the city’s business district. Thanks to a clientele of bankers and tech executives with reliable expense accounts, Ms. Hettich was earning about $28 an hour including tips.

But business slowed down drastically March 4, she said, and it got worse from there. While everyone worries about paying the bills, financial stress is particularly triggering for Ms. Hettich, even though she does not yet have a family to support. “When I was in fifth grade, we lost our house to foreclosure, so I am really sensitive,” she said. “I’ve said if I can’t provide for my future children I’d fall apart. I never thought I’d have to say that as a healthy 27-year-old.”

Her greatest panic came when she wondered if she would be able to care for her cats, Brandy and Scotch, who were cuddled together on her bed. “I don’t care if I have to go without coffee or food or sell my couch. But if I have to give away my animals,” she said, “they’re all I have.”

She cried a lot in early March but got some good news last Thursday. During a meeting in which she expected to be laid off, the manager told her that she would remain employed, on a drastically scaled-back schedule. She then applied for partial unemployment benefits and was approved to receive $478 per week for 20 weeks.

A few hours later, her situation had shifted yet again. Late Sunday night, Gov. Jay Inslee signed an emergency declaration ordering all bars and restaurants in Washington to close.

“Feels like the rug got ripped out from under me,” Ms. Hettich said in a text message. “I had hope and now that’s gone.”

Everyone’s reaction to the crisis is influenced by personal experience. For Natasha Kuhn, a 44-year-old mother and wife in Seattle, that means calling upon the lessons she learned during teenage years spent in and out of bomb shelters, trying to survive the civil war in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

“I was saying to my mom the other day that this reminds me of prewar days,” said Ms. Kuhn, who left Bihac, a town on the Croatian border, with her brother in 1994 when she was 19. “You knew something was coming but it’s hard to know what it is.”

In a time when no one has the answers, she said, the trick is to stop seeking them out from others. “This is an amazing opportunity of building your inner strength and your strength as a community,” she said. “Is it 5,000 disinfectant wipes that is going to make you safe? I don’t think so. For me, it’s just knowing inside of myself that we’re going to be OK. Bad times come, we should not expect they won’t. So you deal with it and support each other and survive it.”

<|endoftext|>

This obituary is part of a series about people who have died in the coronavirus pandemic.

Her name was Loretta, but they called her Lettie. She stood 4 feet 10 inches tall. She was outrageously friendly, the kind of person liable to invite the sales clerk at T-Mobile to join the family for dinner. This made her children cringe but was also something they loved. Pure Lettie.

She was tough. At work, she could stare down colleagues who were hairy, blustery and taller than her by a foot or two. And it was true of her husband, Roddy. He could not say no to her.

Roddy had not wanted to go on their February trip to the Philippines. He was watching the early news about the coronavirus, and worried it would put his wife, a cancer survivor, in danger. But she was adamant. There was something she needed to finish.

On March 11, Loretta Dionisio became a data point.

At the news conference where her death was announced, the public health director in Los Angeles County did not name her, in accordance with federal privacy regulations.

The public health director referred only to a woman in her 60s with “underlying health conditions” who was stopping briefly in California after travels in Asia, adding that “shortly after being hospitalized, she unfortunately passed.” In the ongoing tally of fatalities associated with the coronavirus, hers was the 37th death in the United States, the first in Los Angeles County.

[Sign up for California Today, our newsletter about California, for updates.]

Nearly two weeks later, Ms. Dionisio’s family was still grappling with the bureaucracy that surrounds infectious disease. She died far from her home in Orlando, Fla., during a layover 2,500 miles away. Her son and daughter, on the East Coast, have been unable to see their father, who is in quarantine in California after giving their mother cardiopulmonary resuscitation. For days after her death, he barely spoke.

And in the painful logistics of hygiene and quarantine, no funeral Mass has been said for her.

“Through this whole ordeal, we didn’t want her to get lost in the story,” said her son, Rembert Dionisio.

Janice Jenkins, a close friend of Ms. Dionisio’s, said that the days after her death had felt strange and disjointed, without the ceremonies that mark the passing of someone dear.

“This whole thing is just like a hole in the ground that they’re just throwing bodies into,” she said.

News of the pandemic is released in the form of data, illnesses and deaths compiled by countries and counties. But sparks of humanity glow here and there.

Consider John Brennan, a New Jersey man whose death was announced March 10. He had once trained a winning racehorse named Sugar Trader. “I’m a minor leaguer, and I’m in the big leagues,” he said at the time. “Unbelievable.”

Merle Dry, 55, who died on Wednesday in a hospital in Tulsa, Okla., trimmed the hedges at Oral Roberts University into topiary birds and curlicues.

Jeffrey Ghazarian, 34, a cancer survivor who died on Thursday at a hospital in Pasadena, Calif., liked to quote the movie “Swingers,” the speech that went: “You’re money, baby. You’re so money and you don’t even know it.”

Gary Young, 66, a retired cabinet maker who died in Gilroy, Calif., on Tuesday, was a talker, sometimes lingering for half an hour with goodbyes as his family waited in the car.

His daughter told The San Jose Mercury News that she watched through a glass divider as he died in an isolation ward, and a medical team in blue protective gear turned off his heart monitor.

“It broke my heart into a million pieces,” she said. “I didn’t want him to feel alone.”

The list goes on. As of Sunday, 390 deaths had been tied to the coronavirus in the United States. The average age of those who had died was a few months over 77, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. In the most vulnerable age brackets, men are nearly twice as likely to die as women.

Because people over 80 are far more likely to die, the deaths may ultimately be clustered in wealthier countries with higher life expectancies, according to a study published last week by demographers at Oxford University. The virus spreads faster in countries like Italy, where there is a high level of contact between the young and the old. 

As the crisis has deepened, mourning rituals have fallen by the wayside.

In China, where more than 3,100 people have died, the national health commission has banned funerals. Patients die in intensive care units that do not allow visitors, and in the moments after a person’s death, health workers in hazmat suits enter a hospital room and take the body away.

In Italy, where funerals serve as a central pillar of community life, many of the dead are being buried by a lone priest, without mourners present. A local cemetery in the province of Bergamo, at the center of the outbreak, shut down this past week for the first time since World War II. The local newspaper, L’Eco di Bergamo, ran 10 pages of obituaries.

“These are people who die alone and who are buried alone,” the newspaper’s editor, Alberto Ceresoli, said.

Ms. Dionisio, 68, was fond of emeralds (the real kind), serial killer documentaries and the Home Shopping Network.

She had a passionate interest in food. Her brainstorming about lunch plans, her co-workers would joke, sometimes began at 9:30 in the morning. People not related to her called her “mom.” And she had such a close, tender relationship with her husband that when he had to work on Saturdays, she would drive an hour to work with him just so she could sit by his side.

“I don’t mind, I just want to be with him,” she said, once, when a co-worker asked her why.

It would be a mistake, however, to consider her a softy. When the family needed someone to negotiate a deal, they sent Ms. Dionisio.

“She wasn’t necessarily persuasive, she was just persistent,” said her son-in-law, Chris Connelly. “She would say, ‘I want that car and I want it for this price.’ You would be there until 10 o’clock at night and the manager would say, ‘What do I have to do to go home?’”

Loretta Mendoza was born in Pasay City, in the Philippines, to parents who had fled by foot into the countryside to escape the Japanese occupation during World War II, at times eating roots to survive. It was an ordeal they rarely spoke of. In first grade, she was sent away to a convent school, to be educated by nuns.

“She and I took care of each other,” said her sister, Norma Quijano, 73, who is five years her senior. “You know how the nuns are.”

Ms. Dionisio’s decision to travel to the Philippines in February was bound up in that history.

She and her husband, Rodrigo, a classmate from art school in the Philippines, left for the United States in the 1970s, and found work as commercial artists. They eventually settled in Orlando and raised two children, Rembert and Rowena.

But unfinished business from the Philippines nagged at Ms. Dionisio.

Her father, who had grown up in poverty, had spent years scrimping to buy land for a coconut plantation in the coastal region of Camarines Norte, promising his children it would support them in their old age.

This was dubious — the land’s value had dwindled over the years to a few thousand dollars, and the government had forced the family to surrender the property when they immigrated to the United States. But Ms. Dionisio, as a tribute to her deceased father, was intent on collecting compensation for the plot from the Department of Agrarian Reform. She and her sister had chipped away at this task for years, a wrestling match with provincial land bureaucrats who demanded a long list of notarized documents. This spring’s trip was the one in which Ms. Dionisio would collect the check.

“She said, ‘I have to finish this,’” Ms. Quijano said. “She wanted to settle it once and for all.”

News about the virus was already beginning to circulate, and an active volcano had spewed ash particles into the air. People tried to talk Ms. Dionisio, who had survived two bouts of cancer and suffered from diabetes, out of traveling. Her husband was against making the trip, and so was their daughter and her sister. Ms. Jenkins tried to dissuade her, as well, but understood it was useless.

“It goes back to her never wanting to give up,” Ms. Jenkins said. Ms. Dionisio’s daughter, Rowena Dionisio-Connelly, agreed: As a small girl, Ms. Dionisio would run after a neighbor who teased her brother, who was gay. “She would pull out a wooden spoon and chase the neighbor with it all the way to his doorstep,” she said.

So the couple set off for a month of travel, sending back dispatches from their journey. Increasingly, they were in the shadow of the virus.

“We’ve been wearing our masks to avoid the coronavirus,” Mr. Dionisio wrote in a text message to Ms. Jenkins, along with a photo of a carved bench nestled in tropical greenery. As the trip went on, he wrote, more and more of the tourist sights were being closed.

In early March, Ms. Dionisio called home to announce that she had achieved her goal: Zipped inside her suitcase was a check from the Filipino government, compensating the family for the loss of the coconut plantation, said her sister, Ms. Quijano. She turned toward home, a trip that would take the couple through Thailand and, briefly, South Korea.

There were, their children now realize, small signs that something was wrong.

At one point, Mr. Dionisio mentioned to Rowena that her mother had a fever. In a phone call to her sister, passing on the triumphant news about the check, Ms. Dionisio mentioned she wasn’t feeling well.

Then they were on their way to safety. Mr. Dionisio told his daughter that they had to wait, exhausted, for nine hours in the airport in Seoul, where there was no free seat for them.

That is something Rowena’s mind gets stuck on now.

“It’s a gut punch, because I can see how they were,” she said. “My dad was probably trying to make her comfortable on the windowsill, her head was probably resting on his shoulder.”

When they landed in Los Angeles, her mother called from outside her sister-in-law’s house, saying she needed to rest after the 11-hour flight.

“She was joking and laughing about not being able to get into the house,” she said. “She said, ‘I’ll call you later. I need to sleep.’ And then I never heard from her again.”

When Mr. Dionisio awoke from a deep, jet-lagged sleep hours later, he could not wake his wife. Panicked, he performed CPR and called an ambulance, which took her to a hospital with a weak pulse. Over the next hours, she experienced four cardiac arrests, her family said. She was declared dead at 2:57 a.m. on March 10.

After she tested positive for the virus on March 11, the family was occupied with crisis management, five or six hours a day of phone calls to public health officials, the crematory, hospital staff. Not only their father, but also their aunt and uncle, and another aunt and cousin, have been ordered to self-quarantine.

A memorial gathering, for now, is out of the question.

“We don’t want to put any other family members in harm’s way,” Ms. Dionisio’s son, Rembert, said. “That’s what makes everything really rough right now. It’s almost taken away from what is happening with my mother.”

His cousin, Paula, is thinking of setting up a conference call so that a priest can say Mass.

The check for the coconut planation will be deposited, its balance given to Ms. Dionisio’s eldest sister.

Rowena has trouble speaking about her mother without breaking down.

“It’s hard for me to to come to terms with the fact that Mom is gone,” she said. “I’m searching for her. Her smell. I want to touch her hand.”

Sarah Mervosh contributed reporting from New York, Amy Qin from Beijing and Jason Horowitz from Rome.

Kitty Bennett contributed research from New York.



<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — The American economy has stopped working.

We’re going to try turning it off and back on again.

With confirmed cases of the coronavirus escalating rapidly, government officials have almost overnight switched off activity in large sectors of the United States. They want as few people as possible in close contact with one another in order to slow the pandemic, which may be even more widespread than official statistics suggest.

The federal government has discouraged gatherings of 10 or more people. California told 40 million residents to leave the house only for absolute necessities. Bars, shopping malls, dine-in restaurants and a host of other businesses are closing across the country. Millions of people have been laid off, or are about to be.

Just as there is a public health strategy driving the government orders closing businesses and limiting daily activity outside the home, there is also an economic strategy for putting large parts of the economy on ice. It requires aggressive action by the federal government, funded by what would be the most expansive borrowing the country has seen since World War II.

Whether the United States looks back at those job cuts as a quick blip of prevention or a devastating spiral into an economic depression depends a lot on what Congress and President Trump do in the next few days.

Here’s what economists say needs to happen.

The United States is already falling into a sharp economic contraction: It is producing far fewer goods and services now than it did a month or a quarter ago. That contraction will persist as long as businesses are unable to open and people are not able to work. This is not happening because of any choices those workers or businesses made; it’s a mandate from the government that has frozen a lot of economic activity.

At some point — possibly when a vaccine for the virus comes to market, or possibly as soon as the rate of infection starts declining and widespread testing allows for more confidence that another surge is not imminent — governments will lift their restrictions and activity will start to thaw.

Ideally, it would thaw quickly, with shops and restaurants reopening, workers rehired, factory production lines restarted and people spending money on things they didn’t need or couldn’t buy during the freeze. In that situation, the economy would grow much faster for a while than it normally does, as consumers unleash their pent-up demand.

Economists call that a “V-shaped” recovery, because growth plunges and then shoots up. It’s what they’re aiming for now, but it could be hard to pull off.

“What a recession from something like this should look like is a sudden stop and recovery,” said R. Glenn Hubbard, a Columbia University economist who was a top White House economist for President George W. Bush. “What could happen, though, is a doom loop.”

The “doom loop” that Mr. Hubbard and many other economists fear describes a situation in which an even moderately protracted shutdown of economic activity permanently kills waves of small businesses — and possibly entire industries, like airlines — that cannot survive very long without customers.

A typical small business in the United States does not have enough cash on hand to cover even a month of expenses if its revenues are completely disrupted, according to research by the JPMorgan Chase Institute. In minority communities, where profit margins are often narrower, the typical cash reserve is even smaller.

Economists say that means Congress needs to act boldly, and fast, to keep money flowing to business owners to ensure they can reopen when the crisis abates.

There are several possible ways to try to do that.

Steven Hamilton, an economist at George Washington University who has been one of the loudest public voices calling for aggressive assistance to small businesses, and Stan Veuger of the American Enterprise Institute, want banks to offer loans to cover lost revenues for small businesses — and for the federal government to forgive the loans if the companies don’t lay off workers. Mr. Hubbard and Michael R. Strain of the American Enterprise Institute have a similar proposal.

Adam Ozimek, the chief economist at Upwork, and John Lettieri, the president of the Economic Innovation Group in Washington, want the government to guarantee loans with little or no interest that small businesses would pay back over a long period, regardless of whether they lay off workers. Mr. Ozimek said it would be wrong not to help companies that have already been forced into layoffs by government decisions and delays in a federal response.

“When the government is this late to the party,” he said, “they shouldn’t punish small businesses who acted fast.”

Economists stress that a successful program would be expensive: $1 trillion or more. Mr. Hubbard said a $300 billion loan program, as Senate Republicans proposed on Thursday, would be “woefully inadequate.”

Mr. Hamilton said this week that he worried members of Congress had “not come to terms with the scale” of what was needed. “Any fiscal package less than $1.5 trillion will be inadequate,” he said, “and frankly lead to a Great Depression-level economic collapse.”

Companies are only half the equation. For the shutdown/restart strategy to work, economists say, lawmakers must also keep money flowing to workers affected by the economic chill so they can continue to buy groceries, pay mortgage or rent and seek medical care if they are injured or sick.

One way to do that is by helping businesses — and hopefully keeping as many people as possible on payrolls, even if they are not working. But workers who lose jobs or hours will need more direct help.

Many economists, including Claudia Sahm of the Washington Center for Equitable Growth and N. Gregory Mankiw and Jason Furman of Harvard University, have called on lawmakers to send checks of $1,000 or more to all Americans as quickly as possible. Both Mr. Trump and Steven Mnuchin, the Treasury secretary, have voiced support for such payments. At least a scaled-back version of that plan is likely to be included in the stimulus bill being negotiated in Congress, with payments headed to low- and middle-income families.

But those payments will not be sufficient to cover costs of necessities for people who have suddenly seen their incomes shrink or vanish.

For that, economists say, Congress needs an emergency safety net that would sustain income for all workers who are laid off or otherwise hurt by the effects of the virus. Ideally, the economists say, that safety net would aid the public health strategy embedded in the economic shutdowns by paying as many people as possible to stay home from work and practice social distancing.

That could mean increased unemployment benefits and more generous paid sick leave fully funded by the government. It could also mean something like what the British government announced Friday: a plan to encourage businesses to keep paying workers by assuming up to 80 percent of their wage costs.

“You need an unemployment system that in this moment can pivot to 100 percent reimbursement to 100 percent of people who are not at work,” said Heather Boushey, the president of the Washington Center for Equitable Growth, a think tank focused on inequality and growth. “And wage replacement for people who have hours cut back.”

Americans also need to start thinking of this crisis as different from almost any economic shock before it.

Concerns that have guided economists in the past, like whether policies discourage people from working, do not apply in the same way now: It is hard to discourage work in sectors that the government has ordered to shut down. The same may hold for restrictions that some lawmakers want to place on spending any government aid to business, like limiting grants to businesses that keep all their workers on salary, Mr. Lettieri and others say.

Joseph S. Vavra, an economist at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, said that policymakers typically try to stimulate consumer demand during a recession and start recovery as quickly as possible. Right now, the goal is almost the opposite.

“I don’t think what we’re trying to do is to get people to go out and shop,” he said. “What we’re trying to do is provide some assistance to households so they can sit at home and don’t have to go out and shop.”

The better parallel here might be World War II. The government is trying to win a fight against a pandemic. That will mean spending big on the battlefront — public health efforts, like ventilators and masks — and asking personal and economic sacrifices from individuals to defeat the virus and get life back to normal again.

Ben Casselman and Neil Irwin contributed reporting.

<|endoftext|>

This is the Coronavirus Briefing, an informed guide to the global outbreak. Sign up here to get the briefing by email. 

About 1.1 million American workers filed unemployment claims last week, an increase after two weeks of declines.

Florida became the fifth state to record more than 10,000 deaths related to the virus.

U.S. researchers are testing an experimental drug in nursing homes to halt sudden outbreaks.

Get the latest updates here, as well as maps and trackers for U.S. metro areas and vaccines in development.

As fall and winter approach, American public health officials are growing increasingly concerned about the possibility of a resurgence of Covid-19 paired with a severe flu season.

If large numbers of people do not take the flu shot this year — out of distrust or lack of access — it would increase the risk of a widespread outbreak and possibly overwhelm hospitals as they battle the coronavirus. Doctors believe that the flu can leave people vulnerable to a harsher case of Covid-19, and if patients were to contract both at the same time, it could be disastrous.

To prevent this nightmare scenario, the Trump administration announced yesterday that pharmacists nationwide would be allowed to administer all scheduled shots to children as young as 3, including the flu vaccine — a convenience for parents. And the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said today that it was offering flu shots offering protection from four flu strains rather than three, including a stronger-than-normal version aimed at protecting people over 65. 

Flu vaccine compliance rates in the U.S. are not great. During the 2018-19 flu season, only 45.3 percent of adults over 18 got the vaccine, and skepticism continues to run high, particularly in communities of color because of longstanding distrust and experiences of discrimination in public health.

American public health officials typically look to Australia’s flu season as a predictor of how the flu will play out in the U.S. Australia’s June-to-August winter recorded a 99 percent drop in flu cases compared with 2019, because lots of people got shots, social distancing was prevalent, and Australians decreased their movement.

But this year, experts say, Americans can’t put stock in the Australian experience.

“This situation is of no comfort, as these measures do not apply to the United States, where the populace has never been effectively physical distancing,” said Dr. Paul Van Buynder, a public health professor at Griffith University in Queensland, Australia. “It is likely they will have a significant influenza season this northern winter.”

Our colleague Andy Newman hit the streets to find out.

Over several days this summer, he tallied the face-covering status of over 7,000 people at 14 spots across the city — aided by Melody S. Goodman, a biostatistician and associate dean at New York University’s School of Global Public Health.

What they found: Not everyone follows the state’s mask rule — especially men.

Almost everywhere, more men than women skipped masks. At some corners, the gender gap approached 25 percentage points. Overall, nearly one in three men was walking around barefaced, while only about one in six women was.

Men were also more likely than women to be wearing masks incorrectly — dangling from one ear, nostrils peaking out, or mask tucked under the chin.

“Probably they have to be macho,” said Damir Otovcevic, 53, an out-of-work waiter sitting on a bench in Astoria, Queens. “They don’t want women to see them cover their faces. Like how they show the muscles — the same thing.”

Does your little one dislike masks? There are ways you can help make wearing one more tolerable, like adjusting the straps for a better fit, sewing it onto a baseball cap or headband, or distracting children with bubble gum or toys while you slip it on.

The U.S. Virgin Islands is halting tourist visits for a month, shutting nonessential businesses and restoring stay-at-home orders, while struggling with some of the highest per capita case numbers in the United States.

Southern India has emerged as a hotbed for new infections. The country recorded at least 69,000 new cases overall on Wednesday, its largest daily caseload of the pandemic, and nearly a thousand deaths.

A large virus outbreak in South Korea linked to a church is spreading through Seoul and beyond, threatening the country’s success in fighting the pandemic.

Here’s a roundup of restrictions in all 50 states.

The Food and Drug Administration has granted emergency use authorization to a coronavirus test, made by a British company, that gives results in about 12 minutes.

James Baker, 90 and a former secretary of state, and his wife, Susan Baker, both have Covid-19, his office said. And Senator Bill Cassidy, Republican of Louisiana, confirmed he was the latest member of Congress to test positive for the coronavirus.

School nurses were already in short supply in the United States, but now they’re finding themselves on the front lines of a risky, high-stakes experiment in protecting public health.

A study found that public health information about the pandemic on international agencies’ websites exceeded the recommended eighth-grade reading level, using complex syntax and technical terms.

Dr. Anthony S. Fauci underwent outpatient surgery to remove a polyp from a vocal cord and is now resting at home. In a brief text exchange, Dr. Fauci said he was “doing fine.”



We’ve become a family of anglers this summer, scouting out new lakes and rivers to fish. We’ve lived here forever, and are finally exploring many fisheries in the “Land of 10,000 Lakes.” It’s given our family a ton of welcome time outdoors, and I’ve gained a sport I can do alongside my teenage boys.

— Amy Dong, Minneapolis, Minn.

Let us know how you’re dealing with the outbreak. Send us a response here, and we may feature it in an upcoming newsletter.



<|endoftext|>

Gov. Gretchen Whitmer of Michigan, a prime political target in partisan clashes over stay-at-home orders during the coronavirus outbreak, signed three executive orders on Thursday to reinstate a state of emergency during the coronavirus pandemic.

Her orders came on a day when protesters, some of them armed, gathered at the State Capitol in Lansing to oppose stay-at-home orders. State Senator Dayna Polehanki, a Democrat, shared a photograph of protesters with rifles inside the building, as well as a video of hundreds of people outside.

The governor’s moves, which put into place a new state of emergency through May 28, were in response to the Republican-led State Legislature’s refusal to extend the original emergency declaration on the day it was set to expire.

Republican lawmakers have tried to strip the governor’s power to declare a state of emergency, which underpins the stay-at-home order. Michigan has had more Covid-19 deaths than every state except New York and New Jersey.

“By refusing to extend the emergency and disaster declaration, Republican lawmakers are putting their heads in the sand and putting more lives and livelihoods at risk,” Ms. Whitmer, a Democrat, said in a statement. “I’m not going to let that happen.”

It is legal to carry firearms inside the State Capitol, but many of the protesters were not wearing masks or following social distancing measures. Some demanded to be let onto the House floor, which was not allowed, according to The Associated Press.

The demonstration was reminiscent of a larger gathering in Lansing on April 15, when thousands of protesters mobilized by conservative groups created a traffic jam on the streets around the Capitol.

Ms. Whitmer imposed some of the country’s most severe restrictions on April 9, including a ban on travel to vacation homes and the sale of paint, garden supplies and furniture in large stores. Critics have emphasized that the economic shutdown was affecting livelihoods.

On Thursday, Speaker Lee Chatfield, a Republican, criticized the governor’s decision to issue a new emergency order. “Today, we offered our hand of partnership to the governor,” he said in a tweet. “No politics. We’re all in this together and we should all work together.”

“She just said no,” he added. “Very disappointing.”

<|endoftext|>

RIO GRANDE CITY, Texas — A tense rescue scene has been unfolding for weeks outside a small rural hospital on the Mexican border that has been the first line of defense against one of the most voracious coronavirus outbreaks in the country.

Nearly every day, a crew at Starr County Memorial Hospital prepares a patient whom its doctors are unable to help, loads the gurney into a helicopter and stands back as the aircraft roars into the country sky.

“Very, very unfortunately, of all of the patients we have transferred, none have come back alive,” said Dr. Jose Vazquez, the health authority in Starr County, a remote section of the Rio Grande Valley in Texas that before the coronavirus outbreak did not have a single I.C.U. bed.

There was a time not long ago when the pace was a lot less frantic at Starr County Memorial, whose 45 beds were once sufficient for the roughly 65,000 people spread out along the border near Tamaulipas, Mexico. The county is dotted with tiny villages, long stretches of open road, cattle ranches and the occasional small town.

On an average day before the outbreak, a handful of doctors and nurses treated patients at the hospital for “infections, pneumonia, heart conditions, and roughly, that’s it,” said Joseph Panlilio, one of the hospital’s head nurses.

But the new wave of coronavirus infections has been as swift as it has been merciless, with more than 2,110 cases in the county and nearly 70 deaths that are suspected of being linked to Covid-19, local officials said.

Nearby counties in the valley are also battling surges in infections, but Starr County lacks the medical staffing and facilities of its more populated neighbors. On a good day, about 12 full-time doctors serve the entire county.

“To say we are overwhelmed, it’s an understatement,” said Dr. Cruz Alberto Bernal, who until recently was the only doctor on duty during his shifts at the hospital.

Facing an overwhelming number of cases, the hospital said in July that it would convene an ethics committee to help make difficult decisions about which patients to treat, which to medevac to better-equipped hospitals, and which to send home to die.

“The time of rationing medical care is a time that we all have feared from the beginning, but it looks like we are getting to that point now,” Dr. Vazquez said last month.

Ultimately, Dr. Vazquez said in an interview later, the final decision rests with the next of kin, in a region where close-knit families may prefer to take a terminally ill patient home, rather than leave a loved one to die alone in a hospital room. “We are not deciding who lives or dies,” he said. “We are not creating death panels.”

Hospital officials said the community needed to understand that so small a facility could not treat everyone on its own.

“We were not built for a situation like this,” said Eloy Vera, the county judge.

Starr County, one of the poorest in the nation, is not alone. A study published this week in the journal Health Affairs, warning of a stark disparity in the availability of critical care facilities in the midst of the pandemic, found that nearly half of the nation’s communities with a median income of $35,000 or less had no intensive care beds at all, compared with 3 percent of the highest-income communities.

“Unfortunately, there will be a lot of unnecessary suffering and deaths from Covid-19 because of the lack of I.C.U. capacity in these low-income areas,” said Genevieve Kanter, an assistant professor at the University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine and one of the study’s authors.

As cases climbed in Starr County and the hospital struggled, it began transporting a handful of its most severe cases by helicopter and ambulance to bigger hospitals in Lubbock, Dallas, Houston and San Antonio, and even across the state line in Oklahoma.

The crush shows no signs of abating. On a recent afternoon, doctors and nurses rushed in and out of the clinic’s improvised Covid-19 unit, roughly the size of one and a half tractor-trailers.

It was put together behind a makeshift wall of plywood, heavy plastic and duct tape to separate coronavirus patients from those in the rest of the hospital.

Doctors and nurses, most of them wearing several layers of protective gear, fanned themselves desperately during their rounds. Any hint of cool air sputtering from the hospital’s overburdened air-conditioning system was quickly overcome by the unforgiving Texas heat seeping through the walls.

“The A.C. is working,” Dr. Bernal said. “It’s overworked, just like us.”

Most of the patients in the Covid-19 unit were older, and were grappling with pre-existing conditions including obesity, hypertension and heart conditions.

Roger Garcia, 38, said his mother, Martha Ramos de Garcia, 65, had contracted the virus in late July while she was undergoing chemotherapy for breast cancer.

For a while, the family held off sending her to Starr County Memorial, he said. “We knew it was a small hospital. They don’t have enough of everything.”

But one blistering day, she was unable to breathe on her own, and a responding paramedic only needed a quick look. “Se ve malita” — she looks a bit sick, he told Mr. Garcia, his words minimizing what they all knew was a grave situation. His mother died a few days later in the makeshift Covid-19 unit.

“They tried, but couldn’t save her,” Mr. Garcia said. “It feels like a horror movie. People are dying everywhere.”

Residents are still trying to understand how the situation became so serious as suddenly as it did.

The surge was slow to arrive. After neighboring counties began reporting an explosion of infections in the spring, 21 days passed before a single case was detected in Starr County, Dr. Vazquez said.

But when the state reopened its economy in May, the virus began spreading rapidly through nearby Hidalgo and Cameron Counties, fueled by poverty and chronic disease. Large family outbreaks occurred as soon as people were allowed to leave their homes freely, health officials said.

Fear spread through the communities along the border. “We’re in a crisis,” said Roel Ruiz, 57, a construction worker who was strolling along the river last week wearing an N-95 face mask in the sweltering heat.

The coronavirus, he said, was everywhere.

“I’m not sick. Neither is my family. But I’m afraid it’s a matter of time.”

Aid from the state and from the Navy has staved off some of the casualties that might otherwise have occurred, hospital officials said. Medical specialists and much-needed medical supplies and equipment — including ventilators, oxygen support and IV pumps — were welcomed with a huge sense of relief by the small hospital staff.

“We can use any help we can get,” Mr. Vera said.

As is the case at most hospitals during a pandemic, visitors are not allowed. But that did not stop dozens of local residents from flocking to the hospital grounds last week, peering in at patients through the windows. They resembled Victorian suitors defying orders to stay away from a forbidden love, throwing air kisses and heart hand signs their way.

Inside, the doctors made their way among the roughly 30 patients in the ward — it was filled to capacity — walking in and out of quaint rooms adorned with country flowered curtains.

Dr. Bernal, who graduated from medical school three years ago, said that when he took the job at the rural hospital, he never thought he would be facing the pace of a big-city facility.

“Before the pandemic, I was signing three to four death certificates a year,” he said. “These days I have been signing at least six a week. And that’s just me.”

A nurse wearing a face shield delivered news that the doctor had dreaded but expected — a 72-year-old woman, already suffering from severe obesity, had succumbed to the virus moments earlier.

Not far away, his colleagues were trying to save the lives of several other patients who were fading fast.

Mr. Panlilio, the nurse in charge, watched closely as three other nurses wrapped bandages around the knees of a woman in her 60s who was connected to a ventilator. Her treatment at the hospital, he said, had run its course.

“She needs a higher level of care than we can provide,” he said. “We need to open her throat and clear her airways. We simply don’t have the necessary tools to do that here.”

He ordered an air transfer to a bigger hospital in another city —  anywhere that would take her, he said.

Wasting no time, another nurse stabbed a phone’s keypad with her finger. “We are trying to make it happen as soon as possible,” Mr. Panlilio said.

But there was no answer.

Mr. Panlilio stood and watched as his colleague tried another phone number, and another, and another.

<|endoftext|>

Sylvia Lopez, who was laid off from her job this year because of the pandemic, saw an adorable pug puppy named Ted online. For $400, a price advertised as a promotion, she bought the puppy, and then paid more than $800 to have it flown from Virginia to her home in Texas, where she and her family were in quarantine.

Thousands of dollars later, after additional fees and a crate payment, the emails from the “breeder” and the recommended “courier company” abruptly stopped. Voice mail and text messages were not returned. Ted never arrived, and Ms. Lopez’s requests for a refund were met with silence.

“I was a trusting fool and I paid the price for it,” said Ms. Lopez, 63, who provided emails and electronic records of the transactions. “I thought: ‘OK, this is going to be very simple. I pay money, I get the dog.’”

“But that did not happen,” she said. “It is a very emotional letdown.”

Consumer groups say experiences like Ms. Lopez’s have become more common this year as more Americans seek to foster, adopt and buy dogs and cats as they isolate at home. In November, the latest month for which it had complete figures, the Better Business Bureau received 337 complaints from people about such scams, compared with 77 in November 2019.

Scammers are notorious for preying on people who are vulnerable during natural disasters, but the isolation of the pandemic has created fertile ground for those looking to exploit people who are seeking the comfort of four-legged companions, mostly puppies, consumer advocates say. Many use social-distancing mandates to explain why buyers cannot see dogs in person before committing.

“The pandemic has given scammers a new tool in their arsenal,” the Better Business Bureau said in a report this month about the rise in puppy scams.

In what it called a “Covid-19 bump,” the bureau’s Scam Tracker, a forum for victims to report how they have been cheated, showed a spike in pet fraud reports in April, as states were imposing restrictions on Americans’ movements.

The majority of the reports are for undelivered puppies, especially for Yorkshire terriers and French bulldogs, but kittens account for about 12 percent of the complaints, the bureau said.

Ms. Lopez was among the victims who filed a complaint.

On Nov. 16, about two months after she started the process of buying Ted, she sent an email to the breeder, who had given her name as Amanda.

“I am writing to you because at this point in time I have not received the pug puppy you were supposed to fly to me,” Ms. Lopez wrote. “I request humbly that you refund to me the $400.00 I sent to you through Zelle.”

She said she never received a reply or a refund.

Total losses from pet scams this year are projected to reach $3.1 million, the Better Business Bureau said, reflecting a steady increase since 2017, when consumers reported $448,123 in losses.

The scammers’ tactics are evolving. Many now use mobile payment apps like Zelle and CashApp, replacing wire transfers. They often use fake online forms to process credit card information. Then, when the cardholder gets an error message, they ask for electronic funds and often use the credit card information to fund their scams, the bureau said.

The Federal Trade Commission, which has been warning about online puppy scams for years, also said that the coronavirus had provided scammers with a new pretext to charge extra fees for virus-related “regulations.”

Some ask for money for special climate-controlled crates, “reimbursable” pet insurance and nonexistent coronavirus vaccines. Others ask for money for a Covid-19 “permit,” according to Petscams.com, which tracks fraudulent puppy websites.

Fraudsters also illustrate their sites with stock images of puppies and commonly tell buyers they cannot pick up the pet because of Covid-19 restrictions.

Scammers often go to elaborate lengths to appear legitimate, advertising their dogs as being registered with the American Kennel Club to “entice” a customer, said Brandi Hunter, a spokeswoman for the club.

She said potential buyers could contact the club for verification. The club also recommends using Google’s image search function to see if a puppy appears on several websites. Ms. Hunter said consumers should avoid money-wiring services and be wary of conversations that happen only by text and situations in which money is requested right away.

“Puppy scams are prevalent around the holidays and generally involve someone who has no puppies at all, who is playing on the emotion of getting a new puppy to scam people out of money,” Ms. Hunter said.

This month, Daniela Harvis and her husband reached out to an apparent breeder in Virginia to buy a miniature Australian shepherd puppy named Huck as a Christmas present for their 11-year-old son, Lucas.

After a series of text messages requesting payment, Ms. Harvis used Zelle to pay $750. She was told a “nanny” would accompany the dog to Kennedy International Airport and then to their home on Long Island.

She thought that the arrangement, and language, sounded off. Also, a texted video of “Huck” did not resemble the photograph on the website.

The next day, a man called and said that he had the dog in a “crate” and that she had to pay an additional $950 for “refundable” pet insurance.

Her offer to drive to Virginia to pick up the dog herself was rebuffed.

“At this point I knew,” she said. “I said to him: ‘Give me my money. I don’t think there is any dog.’” She never heard back.

<|endoftext|>

President Trump lashed out anew at the Food and Drug Administration in a Friday morning tweet, attacking the agency’s commissioner, Dr. Stephen M. Hahn, by name for not approving a Covid-19 vaccine faster.

Continuing his practice of publicly upbraiding subordinates with whom he is displeased, Mr. Trump told Dr. Hahn to “stop playing games and start saving lives!!!” He called the F.D.A. “a big, old, slow turtle,” flush with funds but mired in bureaucracy.

The F.D.A. has been walking a thin line, trying to fast-track vaccine approval without undercutting public confidence in the process. Dr. Hahn has repeatedly said regulators will not approve a vaccine that has not been proven safe and effective.

The president’s tirade came the morning after an outside advisory panel of experts voted overwhelmingly to recommend that F.D.A. regulators approve a vaccine developed by Pfizer and its German partner, BioNTech, for emergency use.

The regulators are expected to issue the authorization as early as Friday, and in a statement on Friday said it put the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and those involved with Operation Warp Speed on notice “so they can execute their plans for timely vaccine distribution.”

Mr. Trump has said little about the pandemic in recent weeks, as cases and deaths have been mounting across the country. On Thursday, 2,923 people in the United States died from the virus, according to a Times database. More than 3,000 deaths were reported on Wednesday.

The president has repeatedly accused the F.D.A. and the vaccine-makers themselves of deliberately slowing the approval process in order to harm him politically. Allies of Dr. Hahn have been on tenterhooks for weeks, expecting him to be fired any day.

The president wrote that with “my pushing,” the administration had shaved years off the development of vaccines. “Get the dam vaccines out NOW, Dr. Hahn,” he wrote, misspelling the expletive.

One minute after the president’s tweet posted, Alex M. Azar, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, posted a “BREAKING” message on his official Twitter account, saying the F.D.A. had informed Pfizer that it was moving “rapidly” toward authorizing its vaccine. He was echoing a statement from Dr. Hahn and Dr. Peter Marks, the agency’s top vaccine regulator that officials say was posted before the president’s tweet.

Eileen Sullivan contributed reporting.

<|endoftext|>

Until now, President-elect Joseph R. Biden Jr.’s Covid-19 task force has had to prepare its battle plan without the keys to the government agencies leading the pandemic response.

That changes this week, when Mr. Biden can finally dispatch what are known as landing teams to the Department of Health and Human Services, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Food and Drug Administration.

There, officials will have prepared the traditional welcome gift: enormous briefing books that detail nearly everything the agencies have been working on for the past four years; lists of friendly lawmakers, budgets, accomplishments, roadblocks; and suggested targets for the new administration. The national crisis caused by the pandemic is worsening by the day. The daily average of new cases in the United States over the past week is at record levels, a staggering 173,000, and growing. Forty-five states are recording sustained caseload increases, and nine are reporting more than twice as many new cases a day as they did two weeks ago.

In the weeks since Election Day, the dire outlook has been tempered by encouraging early results from three major vaccine developers. But Mr. Biden and his top aides have said their ability to effectively plan a pandemic response had been stymied by President Trump’s refusal to acknowledge his victory and the refusal of the head of the General Services Administration to formally authorize the transition process that would grant Mr. Biden’s transition team access to funds, equipment and government data.

On Monday, President Trump’s government authorized Mr. Biden to begin a formal transition process. It is supposed to be led by career staff, not political appointees — and the Biden team can expect to find a warm welcome from them, particularly scientists on the team who Mr. Trump has criticized for years.

The F.D.A. landing team will need to get up to speed on a planned vaccine roll out, as well as the most promising new vaccine candidates and therapeutics. It may also designate a career staff member to be the agency’s acting commissioner if the current one, Stephen M. Hahn, leaves before a replacement can be nominated and confirmed.

At the C.D.C., one of the most pressing issues will be taking over a public education campaign, now in development, to persuade the public to trust — and take — the vaccine.

<|endoftext|>

WASHINGTON — Of the flood of misinformation, conspiracy theories and falsehoods seeding the internet on the coronavirus, one common thread stands out: President Trump.

That is the conclusion of researchers at Cornell University who analyzed 38 million articles about the pandemic in English-language media around the world. Mentions of Mr. Trump made up nearly 38 percent of the overall “misinformation conversation,” making the president the largest driver of the “infodemic” — falsehoods involving the pandemic.

The study, to be released Thursday, is the first comprehensive examination of coronavirus misinformation in traditional and online media.

“The biggest surprise was that the president of the United States was the single largest driver of misinformation around Covid,” said Sarah Evanega, the director of the Cornell Alliance for Science and the study’s lead author. “That’s concerning in that there are real-world dire health implications.”

The study identified 11 topics of misinformation, including various conspiracy theories, like one that emerged in January suggesting the pandemic was manufactured by Democrats to coincide with Mr. Trump’s impeachment trial, and another that purported to trace the initial outbreak in Wuhan, China, to people who ate bat soup.

But by far the most prevalent topic of misinformation was “miracle cures,” including Mr. Trump’s promotion of anti-malarial drugs and disinfectants as potential treatments for Covid-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus. That accounted for more misinformation than the other 10 topics combined, the researchers reported.

They found that of the more than 38 million articles published from Jan. 1 to May 26, more than 1.1 million — or slightly less than 3 percent — contained misinformation. They sought to identify and categorize falsehoods, and also tracked trends in reporting, including rises in coverage.

For example, on April 24, a day after Mr. Trump floated — and was ridiculed for — the idea that disinfectants and ultraviolet light might treat Covid-19, there were more than 30,000 articles in the “miracle cures” category, up from fewer than 10,000 only days earlier. Mr. Trump drove those increases, the study found.

To those who have been watching Mr. Trump’s statements, the idea that he is responsible for spreading or amplifying misinformation might not come as a huge shock. The president has also been feeding disinformation campaigns around the presidential election and mail-in voting that Russian actors have amplified — and his own government has tried to stop.

But in interviews, the Cornell researchers said they expected to find more mentions of conspiracy theories, and not so many articles involving Mr. Trump.

Public health experts know that clear, concise and accurate information is the foundation of an effective response to an outbreak of infectious disease. Misinformation around the pandemic is “one of the major reasons” the United States is not doing as well as other countries in fighting the pandemic, said Dr. Joshua Sharfstein, a vice dean at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health and a former principal deputy commissioner at the Food and Drug Administration.

“There is a science of rumors. It’s when there is uncertainty and fear,” said Dr. Sharfstein, who teaches on public health crisis communications. In the absence of treatments or vaccines, he said, honest and consistent messaging is essential.

“This is what we need to save lives,” he said. “If it’s not done well, you get far more infections and deaths.”

The Cornell Alliance for Science, which spearheaded the study, is a nonprofit devoted to using science to enhance food security and improve environmental sustainability. One of its aims is to promote science-based decision-making. Dr. Evanega and a Cornell colleague, Mark Lynas, partnered with media researchers at Cision, a company that performs media analysis, to conduct the study. Dr. Evanega said the study was being peer reviewed by an academic journal, but the process was lengthy and the authors withdrew it because they felt they had compelling public health information to share.

The researchers sought to identify all mentions of misinformation in “traditional media” — including in The New York Times and other major news outlets. They included fact-checking articles that corrected misinformation in their total tally. But fact-checking articles accounted for only 16.4 percent of those that included misinformation, “suggesting that the majority of Covid misinformation is conveyed by the media without question or correction,” the authors wrote.

The study found that conspiracy theories, when lumped together, accounted for 46 percent of the misinformation mentions. Among those theories was one that emerged in early April suggesting that Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and a respected voice on the pandemic, was exaggerating deaths or was a beneficiary of pharmaceutical company efforts to find treatments and vaccines. To look for such stories, they examined social media hashtags, including #FireFauci and #FauciFraud.

The researchers identified more than 11,000 misinformation articles involving Dr. Fauci, as compared with more than 295,000 involving miracle cures. There were more than 40,000 articles that mentioned the purported Democratic hoax, and more than 6,000 mentioning bat soup, which was the topic of a video that made the rounds on social media in the winter.

<|endoftext|>

This is the Coronavirus Briefing, an informed guide to the global outbreak. Sign up here to get the briefing by email.

Lawmakers and the White House agreed on nearly $484 billion in new aid for small businesses, hospitals and testing efforts.

Italy announced plans to begin easing its lockdown, the most severe in Europe, probably by early May.

Some cherished national traditions are canceled: Oktoberfest in Germany; the running of the bulls in Spain.

Get the latest updates here, plus maps and full coverage

The governors of some states, including Georgia, are easing stay-at-home orders and allowing some businesses to reopen, despite immense criticism and loud warnings from public health experts that the coronavirus outbreak has not leveled off.

Otherwise eager business owners and mayors of cities large and small are pushing back, arguing that testing is not widespread enough to reopen safely, and that doing so too soon could spark another wave of infections.

“That could be setting us back,” Anthony S. Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said of the moves to reopen. “It certainly isn’t going to be helpful.”

Staring Friday, people in Georgia, which has more than 19,000 confirmed cases of the coronavirus and 800 deaths, will be able to go to the gym or get a haircut, pedicure or tattoo. Next Monday, the state’s restaurants and movie theaters will be permitted to reopen.

Gov. Brian Kemp has said that reopening is possible because the virus outbreak has stabilized in the state, but projections show that the worst in Georgia is yet to to come, with deaths not forecast to stop rising until early May.

Officials in other states, including Tennessee, Ohio and Colorado, have signaled that they will probably allow stay-at-home orders to expire in the next few weeks.

South Carolina moved even faster than Georgia. Gov. Henry McMaster allowed “nonessential” retail shops like sporting goods stores, bookstores and craft stores to reopen on Tuesday, and the state’s beaches are open again.

Chris Dixon, reporting for The Times, spoke to Tim Goodwin, the mayor of Folly Beach, outside Charleston, S.C., who was struggling with Governor McMaster’s plans and what may happen if the virus surges.

“He said, every time he hears talk about opening things up, he hears the theme music from ‘Jaws’ in his head,” Chris said of the mayor. “He doesn’t want to be the guy who opens up the town and people die as a result.”

The Times is providing free access to much of our coronavirus coverage, and our Coronavirus Briefing newsletter — like all of our newsletters — is free. Please consider supporting our journalism with a subscription.

The coronavirus has probably killed many more people than the confirmed global toll of roughly 169,000 deaths so far.

According to a Times analysis of mortality data from 11 countries, at least 25,000 more deaths have occurred over the last month than can be accounted for by normal patterns of mortality and the official Covid-19 counts.

The totals include deaths from both the virus and other causes, but even so, they reveal a more complete portrait of the pandemic — especially because most countries count as Covid-19 deaths only those that occur in hospitals.

“Whatever number is reported on a given day is going to be a gross underestimate,” a demographer at the Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research in Germany said.

European nations, for example, have seen 20 to 30 percent more people dying than normal. Deaths have quadrupled in New York City and more than doubled in Paris.

The differences are especially pronounced in cities and countries that were slow to acknowledge the crisis. Istanbul, for example, recorded about 2,100 more deaths than expected from mid-March to mid-April — about twice the official number of Covid-19 deaths reported for the whole country in that period.

The virus may have played a role in increasing the number of deaths even among people who were not infected, as the crisis strained health care systems and limited treatment for other ailments.

There’s bad news from an analysis of coronavirus patients at Veterans Health Administration hospitals who were given hydroxychloroquine, the malaria drug widely promoted (including by President Trump) as a potential treatment for Covid-19.

The drug didn’t work.

In fact, researchers found that death rates were higher for patients who got the drug, either alone or in combination with an antibiotic, than among those receiving standard care.

Hydroxychloroquine has not been shown to have antiviral effects in humans, though a laboratory study suggested that it might. There has been speculation that the drug might make patients’ symptoms less severe if they experience a “cytokine storm” — a harmful overreaction by the body’s immune system.

Researchers analyzed the medical records of 368 men with confirmed coronavirus infections treated at the hospitals. About 28 percent of those who received hydroxychloroquine died, they found, compared with 11 percent of those who did not receive it. They also found that the drug had made no difference in whether patients wound up needing ventilators.

The analysis was not a controlled experiment or drug trial, so it is possible that other factors played a role in the higher observed death rate. Trials of the drug are still being conducted.

The researchers did not track hydroxychloroquine’s side effects, which can be significant. A trial in Brazil involving a very similar drug, chloroquine, was halted earlier this month when many participants developed heart rhythm problems.

The National Institutes of Health reiterated on Tuesday that there is no proven drug for treating coronavirus patients, and it advised against using hydroxychloroquine outside of approved clinical trials.

Italy has split into two countries in the pandemic: the wealthier north, much harder hit but preparing to emerge from lockdown, and the poorer south, which fears a second wave that would overwhelm its limited resources.

Indonesia has a fatality rate of nearly 9 percent, with 7,135 confirmed cases and 616 deaths. It is barring millions of residents from traveling for Eid al-Fitr, the Muslim holiday celebrating the end of Ramadan.

“It is a plague on a biblical scale.” The Hasidic Jewish community in New York City has been particularly hard hit, recording roughly 700 deaths.

At least 150 people have tested positive for the virus at a hotel in Greece that houses migrants.

Hong Kong extended its social-distancing restrictions to May 7, after a second wave of infections linked to residents returning from the United States and Europe.



Donate your stimulus check. If you don’t need the money, you might consider donating it to an organization working directly on coronavirus relief efforts.

Rethink how to discipline your kids. Cooped-up children need more compassion than usual. Try responding to misbehavior with empathy first, then remind them about rules and expectations.

Be easier to live with. For those sharing houses or apartments with roommates, we have some tips for minimizing friction in close confines.

Make home schooling easier. Want your children to treat you like their teacher during lesson time? Here’s how to keep them engaged.

The Senate passed a $484 billion coronavirus relief package that would replenish a depleted loan program for small businesses and provide funds for hospitals and coronavirus testing. The House is expected to pass the bill on Thursday.

We asked photographers to create a diary showing how they experience isolation. 

Poison call centers have noticed an alarming trend: Accidental exposures to household cleaners and disinfectants are up significantly.

The Neiman Marcus Group is expected to file for bankruptcy within a few days — the first major retailer driven under by the coronavirus crisis, but probably not the last.

Hobbled by government scandal and dysfunction, Puerto Rico has been testing for coronavirus at a much lower rate than anywhere else in the United States.

How could we head off future pandemics? With enough resources, researchers believe they could pre-emptively create vaccines and drugs to fight viral threats before they spread.

With the fragility of life being so visceral at the moment, I decided to write thank-you letters to people who’ve impacted my life in meaningful ways. Some I haven’t spoken to in 30 years. I want them to know.

— Hani Avital, Los Angeles

Let us know how you’re dealing with the outbreak. Send us a response here, and we may feature it in an upcoming newsletter.

Lara Takenaga and Jonathan Wolfe helped write today’s newsletter. 

Email your thoughts to briefing@nytimes.com. Did a friend forward you the briefing? Sign up here.

<|endoftext|>

This is the Coronavirus Briefing, an informed guide to the global outbreak. Sign up here to get the briefing by email.

The border between the U.S. and Canada will remain closed until July 21, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau announced today.

U.S. retail sales rebounded in May as stores and restaurants reopened, rising 17.7 percent from the previous month.

The San Francisco Opera and the Lyric Opera of Chicago, two of the top American opera companies, are canceling their fall seasons.

Get the latest updates here, plus maps and a tracker for U.S. metro areas.

Six months into the outbreak, we have what might be the best news yet on a treatment: Scientists in Britain say they have identified the first drug shown to reduce coronavirus-related deaths.

The steroid dexamethasone, a decades-old anti-inflammatory drug, appears to help patients with dire cases of Covid-19. Experts believe the drug is effective in calming the overactive immune response known as a cytokine storm.

For patients on ventilators, it reduced the death rate by a third, the scientists said; for those on oxygen, death rates dropped by a fifth. The drug showed no benefit for patients who did not need respiratory support.

Another benefit of the drug is that it’s very cheap — around $8 per treatment, according to one of the leaders of the trial. It’s also widely available and already sitting on pharmacy shelves around the world.

Even so, some doctors are urging caution, noting that in the rush to find treatments some high-profile findings have later been retracted or walked back.

When care isn’t cheap. Most coronavirus tests in the U.S. cost $100, but some providers have taken advantage of an unregulated health care system and insurers’ obligation to cover testing, charging thousands of dollars.

The list of once-innocuous things that we now fear — hugs, handshakes, surfaces — just got longer. A new study found that flushing a toilet releases a plume of aerosols that can linger long enough to be inhaled by the next person, or land elsewhere in the bathroom.

Using simulations, the researchers showed that the clouds can send coronavirus particles up to three feet high. A single flush produces about 6,000 tiny droplets and even tinier aerosols.

Previous research has found viable particles in infected people’s feces, and while the virus prefers the lungs and respiratory tract, it has also been known to settle in the small intestine. The degree to which toilets contribute to transmission remains unknown, but you can take precautions: When possible, close the lid before you flush, and wear a mask in public or shared bathrooms.

Getting creative: To avoid the need for public restrooms, some people have turned to portable solutions. Makers of niche products like the Feminal, a urinal for women, have seen sales surge during the pandemic, NPR reports.

Local officials are pleading with President Trump to cancel his campaign rally in Tulsa, Okla., on Saturday or move it outdoors, warning that the event — slated for a 20,000-person indoor arena — is likely to worsen an already troubling spike in coronavirus infections.

Mr. Trump said that criticism was the result of the news media “trying to Covid Shame us on our big Rallies,” and his campaign said it would take body temperatures and distribute masks and hand sanitizer to attendees. Still, epidemiologists are envisioning a worst-case scenario for viral spread.

“That virus, I guarantee you, will be present at the event — someone will bring it,” said Dr. William Schaffner, an infectious disease expert at Vanderbilt University Medical Center. “The Covid virus knows no political affiliation. What it does love is large groups, indoors, close to each other for prolonged periods of time chanting and yelling.”

Hong Kong will relax some social-distancing restrictions on Thursday, allowing wedding banquets and live music to resume.

In the United States, parts of the Midwest and Northeast continue to see a decrease in cases, leading many officials there to forge ahead with reopenings, including outdoor sports sites in New Jersey and bars in Chicago.

In New York State, hospital visits will resume with restrictions, three months after being suspended.

Here’s a roundup of restrictions in all 50 states.

In April, as meatpacking companies, saying U.S. supplies were dwindling, were lobbying to keep their doors open — despite outbreaks sickening thousands of workers — a record amount of pork was exported to China.

The death toll from the virus in nursing homes and other long-term care facilities in the U.S. has topped 50,000, The Wall Street Journal reports.

Still, the five largest known coronavirus clusters in the United States are not in nursing homes or meat packing plants — they are all inside prisons and jails.

A neighborhood in the Bronx helped keep New York City running during the height of the pandemic thanks to its high concentration of essential workers.

The virus was slow to start in many African countries, but the number of confirmed cases on the continent is rising fast.

Sixteen friends tested positive for Covid-19 after a night out at a bar in Jacksonville Beach, Fla., WJXT reports. Florida reported 2,783 new virus cases on Tuesday, another new daily high.

Since hospitals and retirement homes are not allowing delivery of floral bouquets to patients and residents, I have joined a local effort by artists to paint floral bouquets. Each time I paint a bouquet, it makes me happy. I hope it will do the same for the recipients.

— Melinda Silver, Santa Fe, N.M.

Let us know how you’re dealing with the outbreak. Send us a response here, and we may feature it in an upcoming newsletter.

Sign up here to get the briefing by email.

Tom Wright-Piersanti contributed to today’s newsletter.

<|endoftext|>

By Anne Daugherty

Good morning.

By Anne Daugherty

(Here’s the sign-up, if you don’t already get California Today by email.)

PARADISE, Calif. — When Gov. Gavin Newsom announced plans to fight the coronavirus by closing down the entire state, including schools, the seniors at Paradise High School began peppering local officials with one insistent question: What does this mean for graduation?

The senior class of Paradise High, 142 strong, is a unique bunch, survivors of back-to-back crises that tested bonds of friendship, family and community in extreme ways. As juniors, most of them lost homes in the Camp Fire, which razed much of this town. As seniors, their final months of school were spent sheltering in place, cut off from one another and the usual rites of passage they had hoped would help restore those bonds.

All they wanted was a proper graduation, a final glorious expression of teenage solidarity, a moment to collectively acknowledge all that had been endured and overcome. “We’ve been trying to get back on track ever since the fire, and Covid-19 threw us back off,” one senior, Caitlyn Leckbee, said.

And so the Paradise class of 2020 and their parents pushed and prodded over the next 10 weeks for an exception to Mr. Newsom’s shelter-in-place and social-distancing guidelines that looked certain to derail not just their graduation dreams, but also a celebration that many here viewed as important to the restoration of a scarred community that saw its population plummet to roughly 4,000 from 27,000 before the fire.

Wendy Limbaugh, whose daughter Malorie was a senior, immediately wrote the governor to explain why this graduation was so critical. “They drove through flames to safety and several were trapped in parking lots, separated from families, and forced to flee the fire on foot,” she wrote. “Then Covid-19 cut their year short and separated them from their support groups and teachers.”

Students and parents lobbied local representatives; enlisted the support of the Paradise school superintendent, Tom Taylor; and began studying the fine print of ever-changing Covid-19 public health directives to find a loophole that would allow them to hold a graduation ceremony in the traditional space of the Paradise High football field.

“Covid-19 is a worldwide issue, and we know that,” Mr. Taylor said. But he was determined to give the students a proper send-off — “even if we have to do it in hazmat suits.”

The school district began making elaborate plans to stage a socially distanced ceremony made up of small groups of graduates, families and friends gathered on the football field by appointment.

For the town, the quest for a live graduation ceremony quickly took on larger significance. The Camp Fire, in November 2018, killed 85 people and destroyed nearly 19,000 structures in the area. “A big part of the town’s recovery process is its residents connecting with their community and their neighbors,” Colette Curtis, assistant to the town manager, said. The coronavirus made that nearly impossible.

While the physical rebuilding had continued — they recently completed the 189th rebuilt house — the town’s emotional resurrection had stalled. “The isolation is rebirthing all the tragedy and loss the town experienced,” Karen Crook, president of the local Lions Club, said.

On May 10, on the other side of Butte County, in the town of Palermo, an event totally disconnected from the high school would have a portentous impact on graduation. The Palermo Bible Family Church held a service in defiance of the governor’s order. A day later, one of the churchgoers tested positive for Covid-19.

It was the worst possible timing. The Paradise seniors and their parents were still negotiating with the county for a closer approximation of the traditional Paradise graduation ceremony. Specifically, they were fighting to have a socially distanced student procession across the football field, a tradition revered by generations of graduates.

But then came Palermo.

Days later, officials from the Butte County Public Health Department told Paradise school officials that graduations would be subject to the same rules as religious services, with no exceptions. That meant graduation would have to be a “drive-in only service.” There would be no procession, and no seating for family and friends. It was not what anybody in town had asked for, but it would follow the rules laid down by Butte County: one student, one car, six feet apart.

At 8:45 a.m. on the first Monday in June, the first set of 10 seniors drove onto the track circling the football field and parked in front of the empty bleachers — five cars each on either side of the 50 yard line. Encircling the field were yard signs with the names and photos of the students. They wore caps and gowns and the green and yellow Paradise face masks they had been given before being checked in.

Each car had one student, which they could share with anyone from their household. Each student was also allowed to invite one more car of well-wishers, parked just behind them.

“I know this ceremony looks a little bit different,” Michael Ervin, the principal, said from a dais at midfield. “But I know you can overcome all obstacles — you have, over and over, the past couple of years.’’

Jillian Damon, the assistant principal, called the students’ names, two at a time. Sometimes the pairs were football buddies, or high school sweethearts, or best friends. From either side of the 50, a student emerged from a car and walked down the track to midfield, where the two students faced each other 10 feet apart and coordinated jubilant “air-fives.”

Called to the stage one at a time, seniors picked up their diploma from a table — actually, not their diplomas but an empty folder that would be exchanged for the real thing at a later drive-through procession. Then they posed for the requisite photo and basked in raucous honking and cheers from the car-bound crowd. “I was hoping it wouldn’t be too quiet,’’ Bradley Norton, one of the graduates, said later. “The horns, I think, lightened the mood a little bit.”

Overwhelmed at seeing their teachers in person for the first time in months, some graduates sneaked quick hugs with them on the walk back to their cars. When the first group of 10 was done, the graduates took a slow victory lap in their cars as masked school staff members cheered them on with cowbells.

Thirty minutes later, the next group of students drove onto the field. The ceremony would be repeated 13 times. It took two days to pull it off. But the 142 students of Paradise High School’s class of 2020 got their graduation ceremony.

Anne Daugherty is a student at the University of California, Berkeley, Graduate School of Journalism. The New York Times is collaborating with the school on coverage of the coronavirus in California.

California Today goes live at 6:30 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com. Were you forwarded this email? Sign up for California Today here and read every edition online here.

Jill Cowan grew up in Orange County, went to school at U.C. Berkeley and has reported all over the state, including the Bay Area, Bakersfield and Los Angeles — but she always wants to see more. Follow along here or on Twitter.

California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and graduated from U.C. Berkeley.